Anonymous Sexaholics Celibate Church Statement of Beliefs
Written by the Class in 1987

We believe in one true God who created all things. We believe in the real, both physical 
and spiritual, Kingdom of Heaven where God, our Heavenly Father, and His Son abide with 
other members of the Kingdom of Heaven (traditionally known as angels). We believe that 
the Bible reveals historically God’s efforts with this Earth and this civilization.  
God created Adam, the first human of this civilization, in His likeness. He then divided 
Adam into male and female (Adam and Eve). From His mind they had the option to look only 
to Him or to take their eyes from Him.  

 We believe that Lucifer (Satan) was from the Kingdom of Heaven but when given 
responsibility, chose to trust his own mind, thereby rejecting his Heavenly Father. As a 
result of his choices, he became  "fallen angel" and was confined to this planet.  

 We believe that Lucifer was present in the garden with Adam and Eve, and influenced them 
to listen to him and to take their eyes from God. Adam and Eve looked to each other for 
fulfillment and joined together again as one flesh. This was not what the Lord wished for 
them, but what they chose. The God-mind that was in them diminished and subdivided into 
their offspring (as they bore, nurtured, and taught them), and that portion of God’s mind 
was replaced by the same portion of Lucifer’s mind. This subdivision and reduction of God’s 
mind through generations of family trees continued to find each of the offspring possessors 
of less and less of God’s mind, and more and more of Satan’s mind.  

 God gave his people special help by relating directly with Abraham, then Moses, Enoch, and 
Elijah during the early stages of this civilization. These servants of God tried to teach 
His people the ways of the Kingdom of Heaven so that a degree of their godliness (God-mind) 
could be restored. But their choices, even after this close association, found them 
continuing on a downward trend of self (soul) destruction, becoming more servants of 
Lucifer than of God’s Kingdom.   

 God then sent His Son Jesus to offer His people a redemptive portion of His mind. If they 
believed what Jesus said, did what He taught, accepted His Heavenly Father’s love, and 
looked only to Him for all their needs, they did not need to go through the experiences He 
had suffered, but could receive from his mind all that He had learned. They could return 
to the purity that was Adam’s before he fell.  

 Jesus gave a large restoring portion of His Father’s mind to His disciples, and to all 
whose life He touched, equal to their thirst and belief. Those who received His mind were 
"resurrected" from their "dead" condition. The world, because of their disbelief (their 
minds being filled primarily with the mind of Lucifer), caused Jesus and most of His 
apostles and disciples, and many of His followers to suffer ridicule and death, though 
their minds (souls) were very much alive, being filled with the mind of Jesus’ Father. 
All who became sufficiently filled with His spirit (mind) were saved and are now a part 
of His church.  

 At this time, the minds of those who were filled with His redemptive mind and love, and 
consequently "died in the world" as far back as 2000 years ago, are taking bodies (vehicles)
and are subconsciously awakening to the knowledge that the time to prepare to physically 
enter the literal Kingdom of Heaven is now upon us.  

 Now, as these minds are awakening, Lucifer and his forces are again doing everything they 
can to prevent these members of Jesus’ church from realizing who they are in order to rob 
them of their inheritance and to increase Lucifer’s own following. None find themselves 
more targets of Lucifer than do some of today’s sexaholics, sex and love addicts, and AIDS 
victims, for sex is the major way of spending that God-mind within us.  

 For some of these individuals, becoming a sexaholic may be the result of a combination of 
having a large portion of God-mind in their subconscious and having entered a vehicle that 
is powerfully energetic, vital, and virile. Possessing this double force appears to give 
them an almost "abnormal" capacity for being a potent, powerful instrument for service to 
their Heavenly Father, providing they awaken enough to learn to control it. Lucifer’s 
desire is to keep them ignorant or "asleep" by influencing them to "leak" that force 
through almost uncontrollable sexual desires. Thus, he keeps them preoccupied with 
spending this force rather than holding onto it and increasing it, thereby keeping them 
enslaved in his own service.  

 Being a possessor of this double "force" places us in the front line of attack from 
Lucifer and his army, to make us spend it in un-Godly activities (sex, lust, anger, 
resentment, emotional outbursts, jealousy, etc.). However, when we gain control over our 
vehicles and learn to ward off the negative influences, we will recognize that the vehicle 
can become a more significant and useful tool for the Kingdom of Heaven-that this "force" 
is in truth a blessing, not a curse.  

 We always have the option to not listen to negative influences, or to listen to them and 
spend that force to whatever degree and in whatever way we choose. Whether we spend it 
homosexually, bisexually, heterosexually, in or out of marriage, or in inappropriate anger 
or tears, etc., we are still spending it. As the truth applies to us, we feel that at this 
time we cannot justify a sexual relationship with anyone, not even a spouse. "What I mean, 
my brothers, is this: There is not much time left and from now on married man should live 
as though they were not married."-! Corinthians 7:29  

 Those who are feeling an urgency to become celibate are probably experiencing the God-mind 
awakening within them. It is as if our Heavenly Father is helping us at this time to be 
prepared for membership in His Kingdom and to know how  to function in His house-the real, 
physical Kingdom of Heaven. Entry into His Kingdom requires that we have a vehicle 
sufficiently under control (as judged only by our Heavenly Father) to take with us, so that 
He can change it into a perfect one.  
