 THE JEWS AND CHRISTIANS PROMOTE LIES-UNKNOWINGLY
(THE JEWS SAY THEY LOVE MY FATHER-THE CHRISTIANS SAY THEY LOVE MY FATHER AND ME-BUT IN FACT,
THEY DENY US BOTH.)

I came to Earth some 2,000 years ago from another physical, biological Evolutionary Level 
as the expected " Messiah, " or Jesus, and for this current mission , RETURNED to this 
level, and entered into a human body some 24 years ago, Earth-time. For the most part, I 
have spent these years in seclusion working with my students/"disciples"- preparing them 
for membership in the "NEXT WORLD,"  the Evolutionary Level Above Human, the true physical 
Kingdom of Heaven. Now, before departure via a "NEXT LEVEL" mothership, my students and I 
will be assisting my       Father and His other Next Level helpers in their WAR against 
these lies - this serious misinformation - perpetuated mainly by the so-called CHRISTIANS 
and JEWS. Only "Luciferians"  ( space aliens who long ago went against and were banished 
from God’s World) would have no shame in posing as My Father and Me. Under the guise of 
religious concepts, they have captured the attention and affections of millions of humans 
that have been prepared by the NEXT LEVEL for OUR return. This COUNTERFIT- the true 
Antichrist and his fallen followers - significantly strengthened their position beginning 
in particular with the Charismatic, Evangelical movement of the 60’s, because of their 
awareness of our impending arrival. Their theme was, "Jesus shed His blood for you - you 
don’t have to do anything to get to Heaven but repent and take Jesus into your heart as 
your personal Savior." These IMPOSTERS( the Luciferians) have humans looking to them as 
"God" (in their prayers) for things of this world, and identifying as their human body 
instead of as the spirit or soul which occupies it. These false "gods" have in fact robbed 
these souls of their extremely rare opportunity to move up the evolutionary ladder. They 
have enslaved humans to the service of their interests through addictions to indulgences, 
with a total preoccupation with "replication" (reproduction - sex), drugs, ties, 
self-worth (ego), possessions, position, human responsibilities, false religious concepts 
( such as marriage, family), mammalian behavior, and a worthless "love" for this world and 
its inhabitants - trying to make reverent that which is abominable in the eyes of the Next 
Level. 

No one who knows me or my Father would, PARTICULARLY AT THIS TIME, desire to continue 
preaching marriage, family, church membership, Peace or Heaven on Earth, or to extend 
their existence in the human kingdom. A true seeker who really wants to know what Jesus 
required  of His disciples in order to go with Him into His Father’s Kingdom would read 
what JESUS SAID (His sayings in the Red Letter edition) on these subjects in the gospels. 
Two perfect examples are: Luke 14:26-27, "If any man come to me, and hate not his father, 
and mother, and wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters, yea, and his own life also, 
he cannot be my  disciple;" and John 12:44-50, " But Jesus loudly declared, The one who 
believes in me does not believe in and trust in and rely on me, but in Him who sent me.  
And whoever sees me sees Him who sent me. I have come as a Light (truthbearer) into the 
darkness. If anyone hears my teachings and fails to observe them, it is not I who judges 
him. For I have not come to judge and condemn and  to pass sentence and to inflict penalty 
on the world, but to save the world. Anyone who rejects me and persistently sets me at 
naught, refusing to accept my teachings, has his judge; for the message that I have spoken 
will itself judge and convict him at the last day. This is because I have never spoken on 
my own authority or of my own accord or as self-appointed, but the Father who sent me has 
Himself given me orders what to say and what to tell. And I know that His commandment is 
eternal life. So whatever I speak, I am saying what My Father has told me to say and in 
accordance with His instructions." 

The requirements for entering the Kingdom of Heaven (and exiting the human level of 
existence) are always the  same. Only servants of THE OPPOSITION would dilute even one of 
these requirements. 

This is now the "tail end" of our task and the Next Level’s presence here. The human 
kingdom was never meant to be anything but a stepping stone - a "realized hell" that must
be evacuated WITH THE HELP OF A REPRESENTATIVE FROM THE NEXT EVOLUTIONARY  LEVEL - THE 
KINGDOM OF HEAVEN. 

If you can identify with these thoughts, you are possibly one who might be chosen to go 
with us. 

If you see what we say as blasphemous, then you have clearly chosen to be a part of the 
opposition. 
