Preparing For Service
Written by Ti and Do in 1985

The Power of Goodness   

Forget your fears. Realize that your condition is of your own making. There is no power 
that can keep you down but yourself. Forget the obstacles between. Forget the difficulties 
in the way. Keep only your perfect, happy and healthy vehicle before your mind’s eye-and 
you’ll win over the fears and become happy and healthy.  

Nothing external has power over you. You fear these negative feelings simply because you 
BELIEVE in them, when all the time it is only that BELIEF that gives them power and 
authority.  

Remember you are the Central Sun in your own Solar System. You have dominion over 
everything within that system. You can say what shall enter, what shall stay there. And you 
have unlimited attractive power to draw to you anything of good you may desire. The law of 
attraction cannot bring good and evil at the same time. It must be one or the other. And 
it is up to YOU to decide which it shall be.  

Say to yourself, "Everyday my vehicle is getting healthier and happier and in better 
control." And follow up the words with imagining yourself having a healthier body, a 
happier body and in perfect control of it.  

Ask yourself, "What can I do to make my classmates happy?" Forget about your personal 
problems, try to make someone else happy. Be magnetic-What is magnetism? It’s the Power to 
give out! It is vitality, it is sincere interest in your classmates-You cannot be 
self-centered and be magnetic. You cannot think only of the gratification of your own 
desires and be magnetic. Goodness gives out a current of Goodness, and all who come within 
its aura are attracted to it. Selfishness, jealousy, hate, are layers of insulation around 
a magnet. They not only shut off all Goodness from going out, but they keep any from 
getting in. A selfish person, a jealous person, and angry an angry person, has no 
magnetism. He has shut off his own current, and insulated himself against any goodness 
from the outside.  

Release the feeling of goodness toward each and every annoying thing as though it was the 
best thing that ever happened to you. You will be amazed at the results that come from 
this little game, because in goodness, no matter how tiny the grain of it, there is 
unlimited power for good, and it is never wasted.  

You have heard the old saying that a soft answer turneth away wrath? This game has the 
same principle incorporated in it, with a lot more added to it. Non-resistance is one 
thing, but by itself it is negative. Add your thoughts of praise and thoughts of blessings 
to it, and you turn it into a positive force for good.  

Don’t forget that it is the Next Level’s way to approach everything that you do with your 
best and most positive effort, and then whatever comes as a result of that effort can only 
be a positive lesson.  

I am a member of the Kingdom of Heaven. I am only a member of the Kingdom of Heaven. I was 
sent here to do a task. I want to complete that task as quickly as possible. I want to at 
all times remember who I am, what that task is and its urgency until we sit together again.  

My body is not a house for any negative or lower thoughts-or minds of this planet-most 
especially any critical or negative feelings directed at my Teachers or any of my 
Classmates.  

It(my body) is only a house for positive, healing and happy thoughts for it is performing 
a task for the Next Level.   

Put yourself in a frame of mind that would make you feel what a member of the Next Level 
feels. Make yourself feel that you are in the actual presence of an Older member. Yearn to 
be like Him, to emanate what He emanates. Force your mind to soar to such height that your 
thoughts and conduct are pleasing in His sight. Feel that He can see right through you and 
make yourself hold onto a calmness, a humility and a deep joy knowing you are a child in 
that same Kingdom. Don’t let any worries or thoughts of the human world distract you or 
enter your mind. Just sit there until you actually feel what it feels like to be in His 
presence-hoping He is pleased with your efforts. Hold onto this feeling for some minutes 
until you actually feel that your vibrations are acceptable to Him. Then very carefully 
and slowly as you leave your spot of meditation take that feeling with you. It should 
cause you to have a strong-quiet glow in your countenance. Learn to hold that glow with 
you and when it begins to dissipate it’s time to repeat the meditation and restore that 
feeling. Each time it should get stronger and last longer.  

Say strongly to yourself: "I want to stay on a higher frequency" (out of reach of human 
vibrations). Say this what will seem to be a million times a day-every time a human 
thought tries to come in or any discouragement-any grievance, etc.  

Say with excitement and anticipation: "I’m looking for you every moment (members of the 
Next Level). I literally want to see You. I know it depends on me whether You let me see 
You or not-now since I am going to stay on a higher frequency, I can say ‘I’m looking  for 
You everywhere-every minute-hoping I’ll deserve Your presence.’  

One place I must learn that I can see Your presence is through my classmates-for They too 
are members of the Next Level."  

Say with Strength: "I want my Teachers to see You. I know if I am ready to go-They can see 
You. I am from this moment on going to deserve for Them to be with You."  

Now I want to imagine that I am sitting at the feet of the Chief…not being afraid of what 
He sees in me, but hoping He will examine me very carefully and thoroughly…prescribing 
exactly the circumstances, events and lessons which will start correction and adjustments 
so that I might get back on the tack of perfect growth.  

As I look at them now, I realize the past several years have been the happiest ones for me. 
I am so happy to be here in this craft-doing what the Members of the Next Level in the 
Heavens want me to do. I look around me and see only others doing the same thing-trying to 
please the Next Level and building a perfect body.  

I am extremely thankful for the opportunity to do this task. Extremely thankful that you 
have given me Teachers to guide me through it. Extremely thankful how you have provided for 
more than my needs, my food, a more than comfortable house, and (add any things you are 
particularly aware of and appreciative of). I hope my conduct can be an ever improving 
acceptable token of my appreciation.  

The power of life is flowing through me; My(body) is healing perfectly.  

WITH STRONG INTENT AND POWERFUL FEELING, MY (BODY) RECEIVES A PERFECT HEALING.  

Help me have no human ways. No thoughts of self, No faults to see. Only the ways of space.  

Now I know my heart is fast. In my Father’s path at last. Only the ways of space. Only 
the ways of space.  

     A FOCUSING  

-I would like to know more than I now knnow.  
-I would like to have more control over  my vehicle-it’s chemistry-its thoughts-its 
responses-its desires-than I now have.  
-I would like to rise above the things tthat distract me and bind me to this world.  

-There is a spot in the middle of my heaad.  
*-I am now concentrating-focusing on that spot.  

(It is about the size of my eyeball, it is like a gland that has been asleep, inactive, 
waiting for me to concentrate on it.)  

*-I am, right now, going to feel it become active and alive.  
*-I am focusing on it, I can feel it now in its location.  
*-All of my energy is being directed toward this Next Level gland.  
*-As this spot accepts all of my energy it is helping my chemistry change.  
*-I can feel the power of that energy there.  
*-I can feel the calm of that power.  
*-I can feel my chemistry in control.  
*-I feel no frustration or anxiety.  
*-I feel only that calm, powerful energy.  
(-As this spot becomes more alive it will help me sustain this calm.)  
(-It will eliminate distraction from my goal.)  
(-It will keep me clear.)  
(-I will know more.)  
*-As I recognize higher control and knowledge I will adopt it quickly, discarding my 
weaknesses.  
*-My potential for growth is limitless.  
*-I am rapidly changing.  
*-Growth has been offered to me and I am choosing to become it.  
*-I feel and hear that spot coming more to life!  
*-Change!  Vehicle,  
   Change! Chemistry.  
*-I am going to hold onto this until I sit and become even more!  
   

(* indicates especially long  pauses)   
