Prospective Candidate Letter
Written by Ti and Do in 1975

Dear Prospective Candidate,  
 Although no plans are being made other than day-to-day projections; if your seeking is 
sincere and ardent, you cannot fail to make contact. However, we want to reach as many 
people as possible while the "light" is still on this garden; therefore, we must move 
quickly to cover as large an area as possible. Many have realized the urgency of  this 
process and have left all behind to go through their overcoming under the guidance if the 
Two and those who have been in the process for some time.  

 The first requirement in this process is persistence. It is a difficult trip and only 
those with a string will and an equally strong desire to reach the Next Evolutionary Level 
will be able to push their way  out of this dense atmosphere.  

 This is not a spiritual trip. To reach the Next Kingdom above human, your body must 
literally be converted over biologically and chemically. This metamorphic process happens 
automatically as you will yourself to overcome your humanness.  

 If you recognize this as Truth; you have only to ask with all your might (out loud or in 
your head) for your Father(s) in the Next Kingdom to give you whatever tests are necessary 
for your overcoming. To  demonstrate to your Father(s) that you are committed to reaching 
the Next Level, where you will have eternal life and be able to help significantly those in
this garden, you must leave all your past behind. This means that you walk out the door of 
your human life, taking with you only those things that will be necessary while you are 
still on this planet. Once you establish a strong, direct line of communication with your 
Father and ask that he do what is best for those you leave behind, they will be in the best 
of care. When you have left all behind, you can meet others in the process and they will 
clarify any questions you may have.  

 Because this process works best  if you have a partner, you should be willing to be paired 
up with another person for a time. You will serve each other in bringing out those human 
aspects which must be overcome. This will occur without premeditation. Human irritation, 
frustration, anxieties, reactions, etc., must all be overcome. The only bond between you 
and another person will become a mutual desire to get to the Next Realm. You are literally 
trying to change your vibration level to enable you to exist in a less dense atmosphere and
not be restricted to this planet.  

 If you put 100% of your energy into this effort from the time you are aware of this Truth 
until the time the light is leaving, you will receive the necessary ingredients to complete 
your overcoming from Members in the Next Kingdom upon departure in an actual spacecraft.  

 This is no spiritual, philosophical, or theoretical path to the top of the mountain. It is 
a realty; in fact, it is the only way off the top of the mountain. All roads leading to the 
top were good because they got you there.  

 We do not know where the Father(s) will lead us next, nor how long the Two will be here; 
their demonstration (proving death overcome) can occur at any time. If you are ready to 
leave, give us a number where we can call you collect to tell you where to meet us. If you 
are ready to go you will need: a car, a tent, a warm sleeping bag, a stove, at least two 
changes of winter clothing and two for warmer weather, eating and cooking utensils, and 
whatever money you can bring. This is not  a martyr trip nor a hardship trip, but we do 
camp out and move around a lot to take this information to those who seek it. However, if 
you are ready to leave and are unable to get some of the above items, do not let it hold 
you back. If you are in tune with that Next Level, your needs will be provided; that is, 
you will learn to look to your Father(s) to lead you to opportunities for providing your 
daily needs,  

 one thing for sure, in the Next Kingdom you are an individual for the first time and you 
will learn what love and giving really are. There you will be rid of those influences 
(discarnate beings) which would have you remain on earth vibrating at a level in which 
they can comfortably share in the use of your mind and body. That is the process, 
basically-getting rid of all those human influences to become an individual worthy of the 
Next Kingdom.   

 As time is running short, we feel that a letter, anticipating you r questions, is the best 
thing. Rather than have you believe that this is merely an interesting trip, we have laid 
it on the line as best we can. It requires a total effort. You must be willing to do 
whatever it takes to complete your overcoming. You  will not be asked to do anything 
illegal or against anyone. Most importantly, you have will and choice; you do not have to 
do anything. The way to overcome will be shown to you. You  will take is from there, and 
you will have help.  

                               We hope to hear from you soon.  
