What if they're Right? -Statement by Rkkody
Oct. 1, 1997

What if Do IS from the Kingdom of God? What if He IS the same mind, the same soul, who was 
here 2000 years ago in the body of the one called Jesus?  What if they are telling the 
TRUTH about how we can enter the Kingdom of Heaven?  

How do we know they are NOT telling the truth?  People are so quick to condemn them and 
ask for proof that they are telling the truth, yet what proof can you offer that they have 
not told the truth?.  If you are one who is condemning them and saying that they are Not 
from the Kingdom of Heaven, then where will that put you when your judgment day comes and 
you find they are who they said they are?  How will your Creator judge you who condemned 
the very ones who He chose to represent Him on this planet?  How is He to respond to those 
who turned against the very ones HE sent to give you the opportunity to have eternal life?  

The truth is, we have no proof that Ti and Do are NOT members of the Kingdom of Heaven, any 
more than we have proof that they are.  For anyone to condemn them without any proof is 
pure foolishness and simply unfair.  It is natural to be skeptical, but in your uncertainty 
you must leave room for the possibility that this is true.  

Since the members of Heaven’s Gate left in March many people have tried to figure out what 
caused these individuals to leave this world. Some have said these were weak-minded, 
insecure individuals who fell under the spell of a hypnotic cult leader. Others have tried 
to explain Do’s and the Class’ motivations by looking into the pasts of the  vehicles 
(bodies) they occupied. However, no one seems to be asking if maybe these individuals went 
exactly where they said they were going, to the Next Level.   

What greater prejudice against that which you don't know than to cast your judgment against 
your own Creator just because He does not provide you with the kind of proof you have 
determined is acceptable.  If you find yourself wearing this shoe and it fits, then if I 
were you I would be screaming from the bottom of my heart for forgiveness from the one who 
gave me my life and who certainly has the right to determine the fate of my soul.  If you 
find yourself doubting that Do is the return of Jesus, then that's OK, if you don't 
recognize your own creator who IS in Do, then that's OK, but for your own sakes don't 
stand in the way of others who do recognize Him and who want to follow Him as He told us 
2000 years ago and as He told us again in March of 1997. 
