Ruffles "Snacks for Thinkers"
Written by the Class in 1979

Our mission, should we choose to accept it, is to pursue the endless discovery of truth.  
The greatest wisdom is being forever in search of greater wisdom. There is always more  
wisdom to be gained, but it is meaningfully obtained only by those who exert the effort to 
seek it out.  

In the thirsting for knowledge comes more  knowledge; "Seek, and the door shall be opened".  

No one gains an understanding of goodness or wisdom or rightness, or whatever you want to 
call it that makes life most worth living, just because it "happens" to them. They find it 
because they want it and are willing to fight for it and live by it in the face of all odds.   

Any concept of truth is temporary and will become obsolete if the seeker grows. It is 
healthy to recognize what used to be "profound" as presently inadequate.  

Everyone interprets the truth at his own level of understanding.  

The real value of a mistake is in the learning from it. Mistakes should be welcomed as 
opportunities to move beyond them.  

Those who are preoccupied with condemning the mistakes of others have lost sight of 
learning from their own.  

Putting a man into a cage because he behaves like an animal is society’s way of confessing 
its own failure to become human.  

An alcoholic is merely someone who has an addiction that is unacceptable to society. But 
the rest of society requires their daily "fix" of attention, affection, entertainment or 
whatever else seems perfectly "normal" and acceptable for them to need. Actually, man needs 
only one thing –a healthy relationship with their Creator. The rest is only one brand of 
booze or another and none of it is as essential as men think it is.  

The worst excuse for doing anything is "everybody else does’. The worst excuse for not 
doing something exceptional is "nobody else does".  

People may be bound in some ways by their circumstances, but even if they can’t break 
completely out of their immediate condition, there’s no justification for stagnation. What 
more people need to learn is how to bring fresh water into the fish bowl of their lives.  

The most severe restrictions can offer the greatest freedoms.  

Reality is not something you escape from- reality is something you escape to.  

It is easy to condemn someone who leaves society to look for something better. It is more 
difficult to admit that the non-conformist may be the one who cannot wait because he sees a 
higher vision to which the rest are blind.  

What is logical to the one who is content with being human is not necessarily logical to 
one who is looking for more that what the human kingdom has to offer.  

A life continues so long as it seeks to learn.  
 When life is sparked by desire  
 And effort gives fuel to the fire  
 Then  upward devotion  
 Can bring forward motion  
 And birth to a level that’s higher.  

All errors are in the past, any so-called error is a feather in your cap of you take the 
lesson and thereafter, with greater strength, deal with that aspect.  

Man does not have to see things as he always saw them before. Man is designed to see things 
as he never saw them before—to see them in a higher way than ever before. This is the kind 
of change that must take place before man becomes an adult.  

You cannot perceive the merits or short-comings of others unless you are capable of them 
yourself.  

Eyes are merely telescopes; the mind sees through them.  

It is easier to focus eyes that are open, than it is to open eyes that are sewn,  

differing viewpoints are not permanently hinged to the structure or hierarchy of age. They 
are linked to the varying focus of desire.  

The strongest desire in the world  is to survive, the next is to please. But if the second 
is directed   to the right source, the first is never a concern.  

Change for change’s sake is worthless. Change applied to improved attitude has everything 
to gain.  

Attitude is the avenue of perception. Change it, and you change the path of your life.  

A negative thought is like a boomerang. If you destroy it, it can cause no harm. If you 
pick it up and throw it, you place yourself and others in jeopardy. If you leave it lying 
around, you invite someone else to take  your chances for you.  

For every negative thought, there is a more powerful and lasting positive thought. Negative 
thoughts come easily. Positive thoughts are earned through hard effort.  

The negative is what brings the positive to light. The positive can grow to see the 
negative for what it is.  

 There isn’t a negative in existence that can’t be turned into a positive. Situations or 
experiences that seem especially difficult to approach with a positive attitude are the  
ones that will provide you with the greatest rewards—but only if you fight to see their 
real value.  
This fight is not intended to be directed at someone else. This struggle involves only you. 
Any time you involve another person, any time you let someone else take the responsibility 
or blame for your conduct, the formula breaks down. It does not work. The fight for survival
for human beings is meant to be internal: an internal struggle to be better tomorrow than 
you are today.  

My business, and the only business I have, is to conquer what has been given to me to 
conquer. Each individual must take up the slack in his own potential.  

Badness is an illusion created by immaturity.   

To commit adultery could mean that one fails to act like an adult.  

It is natural to participate in sex, but it is also natural to outgrow it.  

No human "owns" anything; he is merely a tenant, even of his own body; but he can keep good 
lessons forever.  

The body is a vehicle of learning for the mind, which uses the brain of this vehicle for 
the larger portion of its abode during the life of that body.  

Every  primitive impulse has a higher application.  

Any man who knows a grain of truth and who puts it to good use is worth another grain.  
Any man who knows a mountain of truth and who puts none of it to good use is worth nothing.  

A goal is not reached by just learning how to reach it. The goal is reached by doing what 
you learned.  

It does not matter how much knowledge you have, or who you believe in, or what  you believe. 
What counts is that you continue to reach  for higher understandings of what is right and 
good and wise, and that you practice your best sense of wisdom as consistently as you 
possibly can.  

Nostalgia is essentially a disease that halts the forward motion of a person’s life. What 
lies behind us lies buried because it is dead. What lies ahead lies only in waiting because 
it is as yet unborn. But we deny it birth when we continue to tarry at the grave sites of 
our past.  

"The same yesterday, today and forever" is the most insulting thing that  could be said of 
anyone, for it neglects to recognize, or implies the lack of, growth, change, and 
improvement. Perfection is a process.   

Energy spent on self pity is wasted.  

The only reason to remember something is for the lesson it can teach you about what is 
ahead. Use your experiences as lessons for your future, not as rivets to your past. There 
is nothing behind you that is as valuable as what may lie ahead if you are looking for your 
own "next step".  

Energy spent on increased understanding is yours forever, unless or until you trade it for 
something less.  

Energy spent on restraint is energy stored for growth of the mind.   

One of the best ways to open your mind is to close your mouth.  

Silence allows the purest mind to speak.  

Real freedom is not the lack of restraint; it is the result of restraint.  

Where self-restraint is lost, so is the meaning of free speech, for the latter becomes 
"freedom to condemn"…draws blood through it’s pen…and ultimately destroys the lives of 
free men.  

Freedom costs consideration.  

If you are waiting for something that is truly worthwhile, and you are doing everything you 
can to make it come more quickly, then don’t waste anytime being upset because it seems to 
take so long. Work to be better prepared to receive it when it comes. The time will go by 
more quickly, and when it comes, it will be more worthwhile than you anticipated.  

Life is not a time to prepare for Death. "Death" is a time to prepare for life. "Life" is a 
time for learning to live the one who comes to show us how.  
 He did not tell us to "take him into our hearts", he told us to do as he taught.  

A parrot can speak all the words of the gospels, yet never know, for even a moment, an 
ounce of what they mean.  

In the Kingdom of God you are not tested on your knowledge of the bible. All that will 
count is what you are, what you have become, not how you got there.   

Pain is designed as a catalyst to growth. It is best taken as the sign of an existing 
crossroad which offers a higher correction or remedy.  

Growth does not have  to be as slow, or as difficult as most folks make it.  

The hardest defeats are doorways to the greatest opportunities for objective 
self-examination and growth. The feeling of defeat is nothing more than temporary 
separation from a higher perspective,  

 What does it matter how much we lose? If in our searching for more …we gain everything.  

You can never lose if your goal is to learn.  

How often do we see that the losses we experience all lie within the lowness of our own 
perceptions?  

Victory is impossible, unless or until you take the first step of believing, even if only a 
little bit, or for a short time, that it isn’t.  

Few battles worth winning are won easily.  

Have you ever wondered at the persistence required for a tiny plant to split a rock?  

The caterpillar is not aware that it is turning into a butterfly. Sometimes, because our 
suffering is so real to us, we lose sight of the possibility that we may be turning into 
something wonderful. If we give up because what is happening to us seems too painful, we 
may never see the beauty of what lies ahead for us when the agony is gone.  

Nothing is predetermined. There is a carefully tended design, offering a multitude of 
possibilities, from which we choose our own destinies, every moment of every day. And if 
we should learn that we have made a poor choice, the approaching crossroad offers an even 
higher pursuit than the seeming "right one" did at the previous juncture.  

It is, unfortunately, a fact of nature that dome plants choose to grow down instead of 
up,,,and hence, produce a situation which will eventually result in their own destruction.  

Can the practitioners of peaceful ways…can those who love what is true, and simple…ever 
take a stand of leadership and respect, in a world plagued with wars and profiteering? In a 
society whose majority are concerned with self first, and others last…at any cost?  

Goodness cannot be seen or found where individuals do not actively seek it out as a 
guideline to living. For ones who have chosen to exist in darkness, vision is a useless 
thing.  

A good human standing tall for truth in this day is like a candle-bearer passing through a 
cave filled with vampires. The word spreads quickly to avoid him, until a way is found to 
drink his blood in sleep.  

Anyone who has studied evolution can see for himself that the most advanced creature is 
one who has learned how to live in greatest harmony with others sharing his environment; 
and the most primitive is one who possesses the smallest awareness of needs beyond his own. 
How true this is of human nations in general, and of individual men in particular.  

Evolution is more than the development and improvement of physical vehicles; it is the 
upward growth of MIND.  

Self centeredness is a Dead End.  

Self restraint is what opens doors to you; lack of it closes them.  

Your actions should not require that others get out of your way.  

The less you serve yourself, the closed you come to serving the Kingdom of God.  

It is far more significant to be the tiniest cog in the machinery of God’s purpose, than to 
be a "unique" individual connected to nothing but himself.  

The dog that really seeks to please his master is far superior to the dog that lives only 
for others of his own kind. All the greatest scholars of science, anthropology, history, 
sociology, psychology and politics put together cannot compare with the simplest man who 
has his eyes toward his Creator.  

We don’t really need to spend great amounts  of energy to try to get to the various bodies 
that are in the heavens. What we need is to spend our energy trying to be like the one who 
dwells in the heavens. How can we expect the stars to accept us in their company when our 
behavior has not yet made us fit for earth?   

People only believe what they want to believe. People only want to believe what they think 
they have become. They want to believe goodness if they have become good. They want to 
believe the truth if they have begun to become true.  

Try not to limit yourself to knowing what is true about tomorrow on the basis of what you 
believe to be true today.  

Truth is painful only to those who choose to hold on to what is not true.  

Higher principals of rightness and consideration may seem cold or unkind at times; if, 
when applied by older minds, they affect the course of younger lives.  

Politeness is not necessarily kindness; rightness is kindness.  

There is no absolute right; there is only an endless ladder of "more right".  

The majority are masters of appearance. Very few are masters of substance.  

You must be totally open and pure enough so that you are unconcerned about others seeing or 
knowing your every thought.  

Loneliness is an illusion too often imposed upon those who seek freedom from others’ 
impositions, and too easily accepted by those who blindly trade independence for righteous 
pangs of self-pity.  

For a while, a human feels that he needs the company of other humans until he grows to 
realize that he does not. The step beyond, that is to learn of his need for one who is 
beyond him, who would never satisfy his lower nature…but who would helpfully offer the 
stepping stones toward his own station.  

Those who worship illusion as Truth will hate the ones who came and threaten to destroy 
their fantasies with reality. Frequently they will call these truth bearers instruments of 
the devil, to justify their rejecting them.  

A clear question is the most direct way to a clear answer. If you cannot ask a question 
with one sentence or a clear thought, you are avoiding the issue and trying to make the 
"skirting around" seem to be the question.  

When any friction occurs between you and someone else, look at yourself and ask, "What is 
with me to cause this to exist?" if both parties involved in the conflict have this 
attitude and take this approach, the friction will have to leave, for there will be no 
place for it with either person.  

Asking God for something in your prayers is like suggesting a remedy to the doctor when he 
already knows what the best medicine will be for you. Therefore, any prayer that doesn’t 
have "thy will be done" as its foundation is an insult.  

Everything brought into creation came with a set of directions from the mind of the one who 
created it. No matter what we do, no matter what we are, no matter what age we live in 
there is a set of directions in the mind of our Father to help us do everything right. So, 
if life does not seem to be working, maybe it’s because we have not read the directions.  

Where do you look when you need help or an answer to a question? Do you quickly rely on 
your neighbor, or do you think that by turning to the "father within you" you can get the 
answer? Next time, don’t look within, and don’t look or feel you can rely on your neighbor 
to steer you right. Look upward, past this planet’s atmosphere and anything in it. Look to 
the highest source you can imagine for your answers, and it will be shown to you if your 
thirst is strong.  

Your most dependable source of wisdom is your own inner desire to see clearly, and to want 
to know, with all your heart and soul, what is true and what is right. This thirst is 
everyone’s strongest link with the mind of the Creator. To look to other humans for 
validation of your own inner convictions or for quick satisfaction of your deepest doubts 
is to dilute the power of that channel, and to even shut the door on its’ operation.  

The Father is a reminder to the child that there is something he can grow to become.  
The mountain is a reminder to the climber that there is a higher place from which to see 
the world.  
The heavens are a reminder to us all that beyond the earth there are levels of existence we 
cannot even comprehend.  

Eventually, all good paths lead to the crest of the same mountain; and from there, the 
only way up…is off the top. 
