TIME TO DIE FOR GOD
 Or
ARMAGEDDON WHICH SIDE  ARE  YOU ON?

We are at the end of an Age, or the end of another civilization. As was prophesied, this 
is the "judgment time" for all living creatures on or related to this planet – in other 
words, the time when "where we find ourselves," as  result of our accumulated choices 
during our time here, determines our Judgment. 
The choices of many will find them in a "mind set" that would see the above statements as 
"cultish," radical, and doomsdayish, to say the least, while others have chosen to seek 
mental nourishment that would have them suspect "Truth" in these statements. With little 
awareness of it, all of us at this time are finding ourselves aligning with others of 
common mind. This commonness becomes our mental preoccupation. Though subconscious, it 
takes the form of our determination or judgment of what is RIGHT or GOOD, or who is 
superior, or has been suppressed or wronged. Some are also preoccupied with racial 
supremacy, which religious concept is truly God’s, and who presently represents the real 
‘Satan." 

There is a simple evolutionary  procedure which applies to those who might leave or 
graduate from the human kingdom and enter the Evolutionary Kingdom Level Above Human ( 
the Kingdom of Heaven Kingdom of God.) periodically. The Kingdom Level Above Human sends 
one of its members "down" into the human kingdom (to incarnate into a human body) – one 
who has previously been taken through that evolutionary transition – to offer the 
knowledge to those who have been "picked" as possible recipients of that graduation 
information. This Representative of that Next Kingdom literally takes those candidates 
through their weaning from the human world – assisting them in their actual separation or 
breaking of ties to their humanness, and helping them "graft" to Him as the Representative 
of the Next Level. Their final separation is the willful separation from their human body, 
when they have changed enough to identify as the spirit/mind/soul, ready to put on a 
biological body belonging to the  Kingdom of Heaven. ( This entering into their "glorified" 
or heavenly body takes place  aboard a Next Level spacecraft, above the Earth’s surface.) 

 At the close of an Age  their are: 
1.  Some individuals who have  connected with that Representative and separated from 
humanness enough to move into MEMBERSHIP in that Next Kingdom, and into a physical body 
belonging to that Kingdom Level Above Human; 

2.  Those who have not reached that degree of separation, but are aware of and believe the 
information that the Next Level Representative brought, and are separating to the  degree 
of  their capability. 

3.  Those who are  compelled to separate, but who have not seen or consciously known of 
that Representative – His in formation or his presence. 
 These two latter groups will be  taken into the keeping of the Next Level until they have 
a later  chance at further separation and overcoming, and they are examples of the meaning 
of – "If you believe … you will be saved." 

 This bottom-lines at the point where the only ones who will NOT BE RECYCLED will be THOSE 
WHO HAVE OVERCOME UNDER THE REPRESENTATIVE’S  TUTORSHIP; THOSE WHO HAVE KNOWN HIM AND ARE 
IN  THE PROCESS OF OBERCOMING; and THOSE WHO HAVE HEARD HIS VOICE MENTALLY, BUT HAVE NOT 
CONNECTED WITH HIM CONSCIOUSLY. These who have CONNECTED MENTALLY are driven, during this 
period, to go against the world – the systems, the socially and politically accepted 
"norms" – and are determined ( as if they can’t help themselves) to go to "God" or Allah, 
by any name, and to die in opposition to this world, or to simply leave it, even by their 
own hand if necessary – to " go to  God" or His Son, according to whatever their religious 
backgrounds may have been. (For this "End of the Age" task, this Representative and His 
Father have been closely relating to this civilization since the early 1970’s – their 
thoughts have been in this atmosphere and "tappable" during this time.) Some examples of 
those whose ideologies suggest that they have CONNECTED MENTALLY, cover a broad spectrum – 
from the Weavers at Ruby Ridge, the Branch Davidians at Waco, the Unabomber, the Order of 
the Solar Temple, Aum Shinri Kyo of Japan, the Freemen of Montana, to UFO believers, and 
others. Many like these are still in hiding, while others take the form of the 
patriot/militia movements, and countless groups that are simply rebelling from the system, 
the  "norm," and WANT TO GO TO GOD, OR LEAVE THIS CORRUPT WORLD, at any price. 

To the groups and individuals mentioned above, and to this Representative who is writing 
this statement, the representatives of "this world" (the "socially acceptable" – faithful 
servants of the dominant religions and governments who seek for a future in this world) 
represent the OPPOSITION, the " Lower Forces," or "Satan". To the mainstream " acceptable" 
world, it seems that the religious zealots are "self-righteous", imbalanced, and dangerous 
to society’s "norm", when in reality, those of the mainstream or accepted "norm" are the 
very ones who have no hesitation to judge or condemn those who are not like them – 
especially those who are preoccupied with God. They also have  no hesitation to impose 
their ungodly ways and laws "of man" upon those of the rest of the world who are  not like 
them – actively engaging in, or attempting to engage  in the punishment or containment of 
those they would consider religious "radicals’. Examples of how this misplaced  judgment 
is forced upon religious  zealots as seen in how the authorities treated the Weavers at 
Ruby Ridge, David Koresh  and the Branch Davidians at  Waco, and the actions presently 
being taken against  Saddam Hussein and Iraq. 

The leadership of the world, in imposing man’s laws,  deceives and lies about the reasons 
for their actions, making it appear that they are humanitarian. They seldom expose their 
real motivations of  greed and covetousness of what others have, that they feel they must 
have or remain in control of, in order to continue "saving the world" from what they would 
consider the "barbaric" or "radical" elements of humanity. These dominant  forces are 
motivated by their own COUNTERFIT "truth" supported by their COUNTERFIT religions. Some 
examples are: how the True God of the Jews has been replaced by a COUNTERFIT "palatable" 
God who encourages "go and multiply" (family values) , "peace on Earth", and seek a global 
unity toward a Heaven on Earth; and how the True Christ or Jesus has been replaced by a 
COUNTERFIT Jesus who lives "within your heart" and preaches the same, i.e., multiply, seek 
peace on Earth and unity toward the future of mankind. 

To state it simply, in this "battle", the servants of the ungodly side LIKE THIS WORLD and 
want to EXTEND THEIR  LIFE IN IT at  any cost – while the servants of the Godly side HAVE  
GROWN TO DESPISE THIS WORLD AND WANT TO LEAVE  IT, looking for someone or something to 
offer them a way out – though some  may be fearful of the unknown – still trusting that  
whatever is BEYOND must be better than what they have  found here. 

What mainstream society doesn’t know is that, in fact, THERE IS A REAL PHYSICAL KINGDOM OF 
GOD from which everything of this world came. THAT  KINGDOM STILL HAS  COMPLETE POWER  
OVER  THIS WORLD, though It has infrequently exercised it in the latter part of this 
civilization. However, WE ARE ABOUT TO SEE THAT POWER DRAMATICALLY EXERCISED – PHYSICALLY –
NOW, AT THE CLOSE OF THIS AGE. The civilization doesn’t seem to learn that man’s laws and 
God’s laws do not mix. Man’s laws are structured to protect money, property ownership, and 
national  and family interests, and religions have deteriorated to support these 
concepts/laws. God’s laws have been reduced to being adhered to by only a few during the 
time one of His Representatives  is present, though because we’re at the End of the Age, 
the groups and individuals seen as religious radicals are also attempting to move closer 
to abiding by God’s laws, and find themselves in irrevocable conflict with those who simply
abide by man’s laws. 

THE ONLY TRUE GOD BY ANY NAME, ON ANY PLANET, IN ANY TIME, IN ANY COUNTRY, IN ANY RELIGION 
– ONLY WANTS HIS PROSPECTIVE CHILDREN TO DESIRE TO COME TO HIM AND TO HIS KINGDOM BY 
LEAVING OR GRADUATING FROM THE HUMAN KINGDOM WITH THE HELP OF HIS REPRESENTATIVE. 

 It seems that those of the socially acceptable mainstream unwittingly at times assist 
those they see as "radicals" in their goal of wanting to leave the human kingdom, by being 
instruments of their demise. Also, the feuds between today’s rival ethnic groups are 
accelerating the judgment of their desires, and the expediting of their end. When we judge 
others negatively, we are judged negatively, whether the rules of those we judge agree with 
ours or not. For a nation to condemn another nation or head of a nation because they believe  
they have a special connection with God, is out of their realm of judgment and is 
condemnable by the Next Level. The mainstream condemns as if they were sure that their  
God is the God of Heaven, for they openly mandate what is "right", "wrong", or proper 
concerning the conduct of individuals, groups, other nations, and their leaders. 

Whether we like it or not, the Armageddon – The Mother of Holy Wars—has begun, and it will 
not cease until the plowing under is completed. It may be that the establishment liberates  
the "radicals" so that they may go "home", and that the Angelic Armies of the Kingdom of 
Heaven will complete  the  spading under- the end of the Age. On which side are you? Will 
you go onto the keeping of the  Next Level, or to dust return? 
