From: Tyagi@HouseOfKaos.Abyss.com
Subject: TOPY FAQ
Date: Tue,  2 Nov 93 13:38:29 PST

                    II
---------------->>  II  <<-----------------------------------------------------
Thee        <<------II------>>  Frequently Asked Questions V1.02 Ratio Zero
Temple              II          Prepared by: Coyote 129 
Ov              <<--II-->>      Timefix: 2.11.1993 ev
Psychick            II          TOPYDigital - ALamutBBS 415.431.7541
Youth       <<------II------>>  alamut@netcom.com
---------------->>  II  <<-----------------------------------------------------
                    II 

1> What is Thee Temple ov Psychick Youth?
	Thee Temple ov Psychick Youth (TOPY) is an organization of
Individuals dedicated to updating and de-mystifying religious
thought. We are also dedicated to creating a world where Individuals
can be free to express themselves by whatever means they wish to. We
wish to break Control at all levels. We experiment with whatever
methods we can utilize to accomplish these goals - magick, technology,
poetry, musick, whatever!
	After existing as an unrecognized entity for over ten years,
TOPY incorporated as a non-profit religious organization in early
1993.

2> What does TOPY do?
	A large part of the work of TOPY involves networking with
others of TOPY around the world. Information is power and the more
Information that flows thru the network, the more power the network
will have. We share our experience, hopes, dreams, and desires. We
will all grow together.
	As an extension of this philosophy, members of TOPY also make
time once a month (usually on the 23rd) to perform a sigil ritual that
constitutes a psychick contact with the rest of the network. It is the
performance of this ritual that defines an "active" member of TOPY.

3> What are the beliefs of TOPY?
	TOPY has no imposed belief structure. We are all Individuals,
and as such may believe whatever we like. For the most part, people
that are attracted to TOPY do feel a certain sense of rejection from
society, and a desire to break the chains imposed on them by that
society. As such, we have a disproportionate amount of artists,
musicians, writers, computer programmers, and the like in our midst.

4> Is TOPY allied with any other groups?
	TOPY is not formally aligned with any other occult groups
whatsoever.

5> What does the Psychick Cross mean?
	The Psychick Cross is a symbol of TOPY. That is its main
meaning.  It can also represent a trinity, a reversal of the Papal
Cross (ie: two long crossbars and one short), and a TV aerial
(receiver and transmitter of information). No meaning is imposed upon
it by the group.

6> What is a Coyote? Kali? or Eden?
	All these terms are used for someone who is active in the
network. They are usually used with a number (ie: Coyote129). The
numbers have no meaning in and of themselves, they are merely a means
to differentiate between Individuals. Coyotes are generally localized
to the USA, Eden and Kali are used internationally.

7> What do "ratios" mean?
	The ratio system as developed by TOPY is designed to help
focus the work of the network by keeping access to information with
those who use the information. This does not mean that it is
restricted from those who do not! All channels of information are
available to anyone at any time. Ratio Zero is that information that
does not require any involvement in the Temple to receive. Ratio Zero
is the Flatworld. This document is Ratio Zero. Ratio One is the key to
the Temple. This is where information related to the Individuals
magickal work is transmitted and received. ALL HIGHER RATIOS are based
on Ratio One. Ratio Two is working magickally with other
Individuals. This can be by working with APs or with others that have
realized Ratio One. Ratio Three is your Ratio Two group reaching out
to interact with others in the Ratio Two level, as well as attempting
to interact with the Flatworld (Ratio Zero). Please note that these
channels are not related to TOPY alone. If you work within a Coven,
then you are working at Ratio Two. If you are helping your Coven to
contact and network with other Covens, or even other groups of no
relation then you are working at Ratio Three.

8> Why does TOPY spell funny?
	A common belief in TOPY is in the magickal power of
language. We feel that the manipulation of everyday phrases can break
the automatic loop of "speaking without thought". We wish to control
our own words, our thoughts, and expression. We can do this by
consciously changing the language to meet our needs.

9> What role does Psychick TV and Genesis P-Orridge play in TOPY?
	Genesis helped found the Temple many years ago, as an
outgrowth of his own Ratio One work. It has since grown far beyond his
expectations. He holds no special status within the Temple, and is not
currently an active member.
	Psychick TV was originally founded as the "propaganda arm" of
TOPY. It served this function well until Genesis decided to terminate
his relationship with the Temple. The ideas and methods that were in
use in PTV are still in use in other, less sensational, propaganda
efforts of TOPY. PTV never had any official connection to the Temple
as it manifested in North America.

10> What can i read to find out more?
	Required reading for those interested in TOPY is the
GreyBook. It is the central document of TOPY, and explains much about
the underlying ideas to the actions that the Temple manifests. It is
available from TOPYsothis in hardcopy form, and can also be ftp'ed
from the site below.
	Beyond the GreyBook, the Temple produces a quarterly
magazine. It contains information on what TOPY has been up to, as well
as a collection of articles written by allies and active
members. Write the Station for more info.
	Most of the literature of the Temple from 1980-1990 will be
online by June 1993.

11> What do i need to do to find out more?
	Contact any of these addresses:
USA:
	Station TOPYNA: Box 33565, San Diego, CA 92163-3565
	Access Point TOPYsothis, Box 410724, SFCA, 94141-0724
	Access Point TOPYSexT, Box 14334 #166, Austin, TX 78761
	Access Point TOPYBabylon, Box 3024, Fullerton, CA 98411-1327
	TOPYDigital:alamut@netcom.com , BBS: 415.431.7541
				2300 Market St #93, SF, CA 94114
UK:
	Station 23, Box 687, Halfway, Sheffield, S19 5UX, England
Europe:
	Der Tempel, Box 1912, 5200 BX Den Bosch, Holland
Australia:
	TOPYChaos, Box A1441, Sydney South, NSW 2000, Australia

also, TOPYdigital mantains an FTP site on the Internet: netcom.com
look for information in the directory /pub/alamut

