[This document can be acquired from a sub-directory coombspapers via
anonymous FTP or COOMBSQUEST gopher on the node COOMBS.ANU.EDU.AU or
ANU Soc.Sci.WWW Server at https://coombs.anu.edu.au/CoombsHome.html]

The document's ftp filename and the full directory path are given in
the coombspapers top level INDEX files]

[Last updated: 15 July 1994]
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
"THAT GREAT SLEEPING DRAGON OF JOY"
a teisho by John Tarrant, Roshi

Originally published in: Mind Moon Circle, Winter 1994, pp.1-4.

This text addresses some of the most fundamental and delicate religious issues.
Therefore, it should be read, quoted and analysed in a mindful way.

All copyrights to this document belong to John Tarrant, California
Diamond Sangha, Santa Rosa, Cal., USA

Enquiries: The Editor, "Mind Moon Circle", Sydney Zen Centre, 251
Young St., Annandale, Sydney, NSW 2038, Australia. Tel: + 61 2 660
2993
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
THAT GREAT SLEEPING DRAGON OF JOY
John Tarrant, Roshi

Someone asked Lin-chi, What is the Buddha-devil?   This question arose
from a previous talk he gave about thrusting Buddhas and devils aside.
As people will, someone must have fixed on one part of this talk and
asked, Whats the Buddha-devil?  So he said,

If you have doubts in your mind for an instant, thats the
Buddha-devil.  If you can understand that the ten thousand phenomena
were never born, that the mind is like a conjurors trick, then not one
speck of dust, not one phenomenon, will exist.  Everything will be
clean and pure and this will be Buddha.  Buddha and devil just refer
to two states, one stained, one pure.  As I see it, there is no
Buddha, no living beings, no long ago, no now.  If you want to get it,
youve already got it.  Its not something that requires time.  Theres
no religious practice, no enlightenment, no getting anything, no
missing out on anything; at no time is there any other dharma than
this.  If anyone claims there is a dharma superior to this, I say it
must be a dream.

All I have to say to you is simply this:  followers of the Way, this
lone brightness before my eyes now, this person plainly listening to
me, this person is unimpeded at any point, but penetrates the ten
directions, free to do as he or she pleases in the threefold world.
No matter what environment you may encounter, with its peculiarities
and differences, you cannot be swayed or pulled awry.  In the space of
an instant you make your way into the dharma realm.  If you meet a
Buddha, you preach to the Buddha; if you meet an ancestor, you preach
to the ancestor; if you meet an arhat, you preach to the arhat; if you
meet a hungry ghost, you preach to the hungry ghost.  You go
everywhere, wandering through many lands, teaching and converting
living beings and never becoming separated from this single thought.
Each place for such a one is clean and pure; the light pierces the ten
directions, the ten thousand phenomena; a single thusness.

Followers of the Way, the really first-rate person knows right now
that from the first theres never been anything that needed doing.  Its
because you dont have enough faith that you rush around moment by
moment looking for something.  You throw away your head and hunt for
your head, and you cant seem to stop yourselves.  You are like the
bodhisattva of perfect and immediate enlightenment, who manifests his
body in the dharma realm but who, in the midst of the pure land, still
hates the state of common mortal and prays to become a sage.  People
like that have yet to forget about choices; their minds are still
occupied with thoughts about purity and impurity.  But the Chan school
doesnt see things that way.  What counts is this present moment;
theres nothing that requires a lot of time.  Everything I say to you
is for the moment only, medicine to cure the disease.  Ultimately it
has no true reality.  If you can see things in this way you will be
true people who have left the household, free to spend ten thousand
pieces of gold every day.

Followers of the Way, dont let just anyone put their stamp of approval
on your face; dont say, I understand Zen; I understand the Way,
spouting off like a waterfall.  All that sort of thing is karma,
leading to hell.  If you are a person who honestly wants to learn the
Way, dont go looking for the worlds mistakes, but set about as fast as
you can looking for true and proper understanding.  If you can acquire
true and proper understanding thats clear and complete, then you can
think about calling it quits.

Lin-chi speaks about as plainly as anybody does, I think.  He says
that when doubt is raised for an instant in your mind, thats the
consciousness of hell, thats the demons world.  Buddha and devil just
refer to two states, one stained, one pure.  Well, we know when were
in hell; we know what that feels like and tastes like and smells like.
We know how thick it is and how close to us it is.  And we know what
the other kinds of states are like too.  And its best not to chase
different states, just to be one right where you are, in whatever
condition you are in.

One of the interesting things that we notice in a retreat is how
quickly states succeed each other.  We normally have the idea that if
we are in hell this is a bad thing, and well have to spend a long time
with a shovel, digging our way out.  But this is not so.  Somebody
asked Nanao Sakaki, the fine poet who saw Hiroshima, How do we survive
nuclear catastrophe?  He said, No need to survive.  No need to survive
hell either.  Wherever you are, that can be the pure land.  I have
always loved Buddhist paintings in the esoteric tradition that show
the sufferings of the hell realmsthey are rather like medieval
Christian paintings, with flames and pitchforks and horns and so on.
But there is always a little Buddha sitting in the hell realm, looking
exactly like all the other demons, with horns and a big smile . . .
So if you are in hell, perhaps you can be one of those demons, a
Buddha demon.

















One of the problems with human beings is the forgetting.  I think if
youve passed the first gate in the Way, you have set to rest doubt in
your heart.  But you have not necessarily set to rest forgetting.  And
we forget so quickly.  And when we forget we do not realise that this
hell realm too is pure and beautiful.  So we start calling it hell,
and we start calling it an obstacle and a problem.  And then anything
can become an attack.  A sound can be a distraction instead of an
opening; pain somehow seems very thick and unassailable.  We need in
some way to do zazen deeply enough so that we are pulled back almost
involuntarily to the Way when we fall out of it.  Walking the Way is
sometimes called falling out of the Way.

Aitken Roshi came to visit recently in California and  I asked him,
"What are you teaching these days?"

"Well, at the beginning I teach people breath counting," he said.
"You do?" I said.   And he said, "I teach them to try not to get to
ten."   I thought, "I will take up that path myself."

Always, this is it.  If you think you have turned away from it, thats
not true: it is still here; it is always here.  Lin-chi calls it this
solitary light, this lone light, before my eyes.  It cant go anywhere;
it cant dim; you cant dispose of it down the sink; a disease cant take
it away from you; even losing your mind, even dementia, cant deprive
you of it.  It is always here.  In sesshin we can see that, and it
looks bright.  If it does not look bright, then we just notice what it
does look like.  And if we go into that, well sooner or later find it
is the brightness.  If it is foggy and unclear, go into foggy and
unclear, and youll find it is there.  If you have a pain in the body
or a tightness in the body, and you go into the pain or the tightness,
youll find something begins to shift and happen.  Probably you will
panic.  Then youll have panic.  One thing is always arising after
anotherand we get stuck on trying to do the last thing.  If we go into
the body, fear comes upwhich is just the ego having a thrillso then we
notice fear, but we keep trying to say, No, no, I want to get back to
the body.  But how can we do that?Its fear.  Then we have distraction,
but we want to have the fear there for a while.

A lot of teachers speak about fear.  It is one of the common states,
one way or another, in Buddhism.  Fear arises because when things
start to open up for us we really cant believe it.  So we have to keep
coming up to the gate again and again, till we believe it.  Its that
simple.  Again and again we walk to the gate, and if we really observe
that path itself, that walking, the sheer joy, theres nothing wrong
with walking that for the rest of our lives.  Still walking to the
gatefortunately.  Thank you very much, I have no complaints.

So wherever we are, we just walk; we walk the road; and it unfolds in
great beauty.  We get many different glimpses, and some glimpses have
a quality of irreversibility about them, and we give them fancy names,
like kensho or whatever.  But really they are just another foot on the
road.  When Yamada Roshi received his final transmission from Yasutani
Roshi, Yasutani Roshi said, Now your practice can begin.  Yamada Roshi
then said this to Aitken Roshi.  Aitken Roshi said this to me.  And he
meant it!  Just in case I thought I had started Zen, he was going to
clear up any illusions I had.  The point is quite serious.  Now it
begins.  Each moment: Now it begins.  And thats the great joy: that we
have entered something that can go on deepening and opening for as
long as we are still kicking and breathing.  It is good to have
something that will be with you for as long as your are here.  What a
gift.  Many things will pass away and be taken from you, many things
you will become disgusted with, but this cannot be taken from you: you
never tire of the love of the Way.

If you want to get it, youve already got it, says Lin-chi.  Its not
something that requires time.  Its hard to conceive that: Its not
something that requires time.  We are so used to patient cultivation
and careful development.  Or even running full speedthat still
requires time.  But it is already here, and everything we do really
just keeps us coming towards, circling towards, that truth.  There is
nothing we need to do to fill the space in our lives, because there is
no space in our lives.  It is here; eternity is already here.  There
is nothing we need to do to extinguish the karma that we have brought
with us: everything is already here; we dont need to extinguish the
karma.  There is no particular way we need to hold our mouths in order
to get enlightened, there is no particular state of mind we need, no
particular kind of automobile; its already here.  This person, says
Lin-chi, is unimpeded at any point, but penetrates the ten directions,
free to do as she or he pleases in the world.  No matter what
environment you may encounter with its peculiarities and differences
you cannot be swayed or pulled awry.

Sometimes we do well when things are going badly because it gets our
attention, but this is a dangerous way to live, because the Tao will
arrange our lives to go badly for us so that we can pay attention.  We
can relax: we dont need to break our legs in order to walk the Tao.
We need to attend.  Sometimes things are going well, so at that moment
we go to sleep.  Its sometimes quite hard when deep in sesshin to
continue to wake up the Way, because everything is so peaceful.  And
that is fine, but peacefulness is again just another state, so it is
always good when you are deep, deep, deep, to find a way to stay deep
and to keep walking.  You dont have to wrench yourself out in order to
keep walking, but find a way to have both the depth and the continuity
of the journey.  So that you dont just become a wooden Buddha sitting
there, rather blissful but rather stupidwhich we can do.  The depth is
good and has a very healing force in the body, and in your heart as
well, but it is very important to keep going at this time.  It is easy
just to forget.

It is very important to realise that walking is Zen, just as sitting
is Zen.  Everything is Zen.  Falling over and breaking your leg is
Zen.  Its right here always.  When you have a wonderful moment of
rapture in zazen, that is the Buddha land and that is Zen.  When your
zazen goes all to hell and you are absorbed with petty thoughts, that
is the Buddha land and that is zazen.  So we dont refuse one and
choose the other.  When we do that we start living in heaven and hell,
and it takes a lot of effort to stay in hellwhich is what we choose
when we have that choice, always.  So we keep always aware that it is
this, right now. The really first-rate person knows right now that
from the first theres never been anything that needed doing.  Its
because you dont have sufficient faith that you rush around moment by
moment looking for something.  You throw away your head and hunt for
your head, and you cant seem to stop yourself.  There is a compulsive
quality to the way we look for our heads, isnt there?  We could start
a twelve-step group: People with No Heads.  Because it is a sort of
addiction that fills the void we have created with our small minds.
We have created this game that we are deluded and then we look for
enlightenment.  But if we omit the first step, we can cut out the
middleman entirely and we can go directly to the source.

Compassion is a natural part of the Way and is very mysterious and
deeply important.  I think we know very little about love reallywhich
is why we talk about it all the time.  Its healing powers are very
great.  It is a natural thing that comes with awakening; it comes out
of the heart.  A moment of awakening in sesshin, even if it doesnt
stick, will still open the heart a little and some of that will stay.
And yet it is easy to fight with each other in a zendo.  It is easy to
be right and have other people wrong.  It is a tiresome game, and at
the bottom we know it is not true.  When I consider the virtue of
abusive words, as Torei Zenji says.  Torei did not say that because he
had no experience of the difficulty of life: he just used everything
as a door.  He was a very tough customer.  He was the founder of
Ryutakuji temple, which has an association with our lineage: it was
Soen Roshis temple and Gempo Roshis temple.

Compassion can not only open things in the body, it can open the Way
for you.  If you remember the basic rule that ninety percent of
everything everybody says is projection, then ninety percent of what
you say is projection, so if you do not have compassion with somebody
theres a problem in you, theres a shrivelling in your own heart; in
some way youve closed yourself off to your own virtue and your own
light.  Its important to remember this.  If compassion is not there,
then that is good too, that too is the Buddha land; but then if we go
inside and notice it, if we reflect, suddenly it arrives again.  Its
like when were going deep in zazen and fear arises: if we say, Get out
of the way, the fear gets bigger.  We notice, Ah, fear; then that too
is golden.  The same with any pain we can have.  This is really all
about respect for Buddha-nature, for your own Buddha-nature: if you
can respect your own Buddha-nature you can respect others, because it
is the same damn thing!  So its not a great effort to stretch across.
Its one golden chain.

So in your zazen, if you get out of the way, Buddha-nature will
awaken, because the inside aspect of it so so bright, its so vivid
that we cant not see it.  If we try to flee from it, it will chase us.
Everywhere we look, there it is.  If you run into a dark room, there
it is.  And everywhere we flee, there it is too; its always there, its
always in front of us.  And this is the most ordinary thing in the
world.  This is the other truth that is very obvious now.  Its wearing
clothes, its eating, its hearing a hammer, its hearing a child playing
a game while youre trying to listen to a profound talk on the dharma.
Which would you rather listen to?  Which is the true dharma?  So
nothing is a distraction; everything that comes, we enter there.

The other point is the gratitude for the Way.  Over and over again
that comes up.  It comes with tears; it comes with joy; it comes with
laughter.  It is a great healing force.  We were given life, and we
are not even sure that we asked for it.  We were given the dharma, and
Im not sure we deserved it.  Fortunately, there was nothing we could
do to deserve it!  It just came upon us; it inflicted itself upon us
in the guise of some catastrophe that sent us running here.  It is
good to be grateful in that way, to be grateful for the things that we
have and for the things that we dont have.  As Yun-men said, it is
better to have nothing than to have something good.  Out of that
nothing, everything comes; that one good thing can become a prison. We
have that gratitude for everything that comes by, and that goes on and
on, so we just walk the Way.  And whatever comes up, it doesnt really
matter; we cant complain that this is not the Way: it is plainly the
Way.  We can say we dont like itbut so what?  Its plainly the Way.
And if our hearts have never been broken, we cant walk the Way; were
still too innocent.  And thats no excuse.  The Tao will then break our
hearts for us, so that we can walk the Way.  So whatever comes up,
thats it.  Walking is it, disappointment is it, joy is it, and
underneath it all you will find that great sleeping dragon of joy that
is always there, snoring away underneath your life, making everything
golden.

NOTE: The quotations in this Teisho, given on Day 6 of the Easter
Sesshin at Gorricks Run, 1994 are taken from "The Zen Teachings of
Master Lin-chi", translated by Burton Watson, Shambhala, 1993.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
end of file