[This document can be acquired from a sub-directory coombspapers via
anonymous FTP or COOMBSQUEST gopher at the Australian National
University, Canberra on the node COOMBS.ANU.EDU.AU or from the ANU
Soc.Sci.WWW Server at https://coombs.anu.edu.au/CoombsHome.html]

The document's ftp filename and the full directory path are given in
the coombspapers top level INDEX files]

[This version: 20 September 1994]

-----------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------- original message ----------------------
Date: Wed, 5 Oct 1994 08:16:12 -0500
From: mcain@nwu.edu (Barry Cain)
Subject: Richard Langlois


This is in reply to your request for information in Rev. Langlois.
Should you require further information please e-mail to the above
address.

The following is the most complete document which we have on Kongo
Langlois Roshi.  Please feel free to edit it as you see fit for your
purposes.


Kongo Langlois Roshi is the current Abbot of the Zen Buddhist Temple
of Chicago.  He also serves as the Director/Head Instructor of the
Chinese Cultural Academy in Evanston, Illinois.  Kongo Roshi, as
an American, uniquely brings a deep and rich experience to bear in
transmitting those most refined and precious arts that have their
basis in oriental culture including Zen and Taoism.  He has inherited,
through direct transmission, many traditions and arts based on his
decades of study with his Zen teacher, Rev. Soyu Matsuoka, Roshi, and
with Prof. Huo Chi-kwang, the founder and the former head of the
Chinese Cultural Academy.

The Zen Buddhist Temple of Chicago is the oldest, practicing Zen
meditation center in the United States, having been founded in 1949 by
Rev. Soyu Matsuoka, Roshi, (to whom we all refer as Sensei).
Ultimately succeeding Sensei as Abbot, Kongo Roshi is heir to a six
hundred year tradition of Zen priesthood in Sensei's family.  The Zen
Buddhist Temple of Chicago is in direct affiliation with the Soto
Sect of Zen Buddhism through Kongo Roshi's registration with Sojiji
Temple and Monastery, one of the two head temples of the Soto Sect in
Japan.

The Chinese Cultural Academy was founded by another of Kongo Roshi's
teachers, Professor Huo Chi-kwang, in 1966.  Prof. Huo is a master in
the 5 styles of Chinese calligraphy, painting and poetry; and a
scholar of Chinese literature, history and philosophy; as well as a
great boxing master, renowned wherever Chinese culture flourishes.
Prof. Huo is the 16th generation of calligraphers in his family
which has produced noted scholars since the Ming Dynasty.  Kongo
Langlois, Roshi also succeeded Prof. Huo as the Director of the
Academy.

Given the significance of the above achievements, it is pertinent to
recount the background that Roshi brings to his teaching.  Kongo Roshi
was born Richard Valentine Langlois in Chicago, Illinois.  His
`first love' is the piano which he began studying at ten years of age.
Although his training consisted entirely of rigorous classical piano
studies, he nevertheless discovered an inherent talent for improvisa-
tion.  Subsequently, he worked professionally as a jazz musician while
vigorously pursuing the formal study of music.

Soon after Richard entered his teens, he experienced a profound
intellectual and emotional cataclysm:  "Everywhere I looked I could
see only a condition of desperation, degeneration, and hypocrisy.  The
depth of this perspective was amplified, because at so young an age I
was unprepared to resolve experiences of such magnitude: I
'imploded'."  Richard's friends in need at this time were primarily
the philosophers Kant, Schopenhauer and Nietzsche.  "I was especially
attracted to Nietzsche and the Bhagavad Gita; these two, Zarathustra
and Krishna, helped maintain some semblance of sanity.  Though,
indeed, the repercussions lasted several years, perhaps interminably,
for Nietzsche remains alongside Dogen Zenji, at my bedside within
arm's reach."

Richard Langlois served two years in the Army from 1954 to 1956.
Following military service he enrolled under the G.I. Bill in the
American Conservatory of Music, majoring in piano, where he
completed his studies in 1962.  As his interest in philosophy grew,
besides studying and playing piano, Richard Langlois became
increasingly interested in the study and practice of Eastern
Philosophy.  He began his spiritual study in 1956 under the guidance
of Swami Vishwananda, of the Vedanta Society and continued through the
study and practice of Yoga as a disciple of Sri Nerode.  Although this
training involved a great deal of intellectual study, the main work
with Sri Nerode was intense meditation practice.  This included the
study of all yogas with emphasis on Kundalini Yoga, an esoteric
meditation practice.

Inevitably, Richard Langlois' innate tendencies led him to Zen
Buddhism that satisfied an inner urge for a spiritual practice which
was more direct, less intellectual, more intuitive and directly
related to everyday life.  He began studying with Matsuoka Roshi in
1960 and officially became his disciple in 1963.  Richard Langlois was
given the Buddhist name Kongo, meaning `Diamond'.  This name signifies
more than just a sparkling gem.  Its spiritual essence is that of
enduring brilliance, dignity and strength.  But, more significantly,
it signifies the Diamond Sutra and its teaching of the Diamond Sword
of Discriminating Wisdom, which cuts away all doubts.  Thus began
Kongo Langlois' training for the Zen priesthood.  Richard Langlois'
previous experience as a disciple provided an excellent foundation for
his relationship with Matsuoka Roshi.  However, this turned out to be
an experience of another kind entirely.  Although discipleship is
always on a one-to-one basis, the training in Soto Zen is of a unique
and peculiar kind; there is no room for esoteric philosophizing.
One's every move, word, act, and response is unremittingly scrutinized
and corrected.  The feeling is somewhat like being under a
microscope.  As a result of this smelting process, one's true nature
is allowed to shine through spontaneously.  This process is much like
a sculptor, not one who models clay, but one who chips away
at the superfluous and superficial so that only the truly essential
remains.  Zen meditation (zazen) is the central practice in Zen
Buddhism for cultivating the awakening of our true nature.

From Matsuoka Roshi he obtained training in zazen practice and then in
Soto Zen Buddhism, becoming the first American to be ordained a Zen
priest in 1967.  In 1970 when Matsuoka Roshi left Chicago to found
another Zen Center in Long Beach, California, Reverend Kongo Langlois
was appointed his Dharma Successor and became Abbot of the Zen
Buddhist Temple of Chicago.  He also was the first
American to receive the Roshi degree.  In 1974, Matsuoka Roshi
bestowed the degree upon Reverend Langlois.  The title Roshi is not,
as many believe, synonymous with `priest'; it is bestowed upon a Zen
priest by another who holds the Roshi degree, as an indication and
acknowledgement of a high level of understanding or realization.
Hence all Roshis are priests, but not all priests are Roshis.  Those
of us, who remember Rev. Matsuoka when he taught in Chicago, know the
extremely powerful impression that Sensei made as a Zen priest.  Many
were impressed and astounded by one who could teach so much, so often
by mere gesture or inflection.  Certainly the student needed to be
willing to look, but if one did look, students came away with hands
full to overflowing.  All of us recognize this as a unique and
powerful characteristic of both Sensei and Roshi.  Although their
personalities are in many ways vastly different, they nevertheless
share in this ability to mindfully, consistently, flexibly, and
powerfully project their teachings and indeed their very essence
directly from the spiritual center.

In 1987, Kongo Roshi was presented with the `Inka Shomei' (seal of
transmission) from the line of Asahina Sogen, Primate of the Rinzai
branch of Zen Buddhism.   Thus Kongo Roshi is recognized as a master
by both the Soto and Rinzai schools of Zen Buddhism.

Roshi's training with Professor Huo Chi-kwang began in 1966.  He began
studying privately with Prof. Huo, who was someone we all came to know
from his attendance at the Temple, as well as directly through his
association with Roshi.  Prof. Huo imparted a thorough grounding in
the internal connections and spirit of Confucianism, Taoism, Buddhism,
and the Chinese Ch'an and Taoist meditation traditions.

During his 22 years of study with Prof. Huo Chi-kwang, Kongo Roshi
first mastered the Yang Family (Secret) Style of Tai Chi Chuan, the
esoteric martial art.  The Yang Style is commonly taught in the so
called 'public' style, which originated when the foreign Manchu
(Ch'ing) dynasty compelled the Yang family to provide instruction for
those demanding it.  Thus the Yang family, while under this great
duress, was nevertheless unwilling to give away the essence of the
tradition to 'outsiders', devised a considerably debased 'public'
style in order to satisfy the rulers.  Prof. Huo was most fortunate in
that he learned the original and 'true' style directly from Yang
Shao-hou.  He was the elder brother of and superior martial artist to
Yang Ch'eng-fu, developer of the 'public' style.  It is this original,
undiluted Yang style which Roshi teaches.

Also while studying under Prof. Huo, Roshi mastered the Chen Style of
Tai Chi Chuan, which historically was antecedent to the Yang.  Six
years was then spent in learning both script and cursive styles of
Chinese calligraphy using traditional philosophic texts.  Additional
martial arts from Prof. Huo's large repertoire were similarly absorbed
by Roshi during many years of study with Professor.  These include the
Wu Style of Tai Chi Chuan, Tai Chi Push Hands, Pa Kua, Hsing Yi, and
Tai Chi Sword.

Also transmitted were the Chinese Health Methods.  The Chinese Health
Methods consist of approximately fifty exercises (only counting once
those performed on both the right and left side).  It is a course
suitable for all ages, but of especial value to the middle aged,
elderly, or infirm due to the physical ease with which they are
performed.  Involving gentle self massage that acts internally, every
facet of body function is engaged, from head to toe, including the
internal organs.

Beyond all these many facets, Roshi also received a thorough grounding
in the essence of Buddhist, Taoist, and Confucian philosophy through a
study of the classics in the original Chinese language.
Kongo Roshi served as Assistant Instructor at the Chinese Cultural
Academy for 8 years.  Then in May 1988, Kongo Roshi became Prof. Huo's
successor and was appointed Director of the Chinese Cultural
Academy where he continues to teach.

During an extensive visit to Chicago, Prof. Tao Zhang, Head of
Orthopedic Surgery at the China Academy of Traditional Chinese
Medicine, Guang An Men Hospital, Beijing, taught Roshi the I Jin Jing.
This is the most highly regarded set of Chi Kung exercises and they
are attributed to Bodhidharma, founder of Ch'an (Zen) Buddhism in
China 1400 years ago.  I Jin Jing demands great intensity of
concentration.  Prospective students must be made aware that the
practice of Tai Chi Chuan has definitely been made a prerequisite for
this particular course of study, due to the profound and subtle
nature of these exercises which require great awareness required for
their comprehension.  In I Jin Jing the student learns by
simultaneously performing the exercise and by closely observing the
instructor,with great awareness.  The interaction is quite intense.
Given Kongo Roshi's uniquely prolific accomplishments, it is almost
unfathomable that one individual could absorb and indeed embody the
essence of so many diverse and deeply spiritual teachings.  However,
we may perhaps begin to get a taste for the degree of intensive
preparation it took to amass this impressive array of mastered arts.
In this way Kongo Roshi most resembled Prof. Huo, in that he was
always engaged in study.  Professor often remarked that only Roshi,
among all of his many students, displayed the assiduous application
and possessed the tenacious spirit that distinguishes disciple from
student.  In fact, as Roshi learned from a number of Prof. Huo's
closest Chinese friends, Professor considered Roshi to be his only
true disciple.  It thus becomes easy to understand why Prof. Huo, the
quintessential and imposing Chinese gentleman,
artist, scholar, and philosopher of China's 'old school', would only
entrust the Academy to Roshi.  Thus the fact of Roshi's American
origin became completely outweighed by Roshi's intense application to
all forms of study and practice grounded in meditation.  Perhaps in
now knowing or recalling these facts, we can all better appreciate
some of the incredible demands for Roshi's time over the years.  One
dares to say that there may well be no American, and probably only a
handful of Orientals who have sacrificed so much of themselves and
their lives to preserve the treasures of the Oriental, meditatively
based arts.

Now we can begin to understand the excitement shared among many
associated with Roshi, especially his old time students, given that
his schedule is expanding at both the Temple and Academy.  One may
truly say: "The reservoir has been filled and now we can all take a
deeper drink."

As Abbot of the Zen Buddhist Temple of Chicago, Kongo Langlois, Roshi
directs services, the instruction of lay practitioners, and the
discipleships of candidates for the Zen Buddhist priesthood.  In
this he is assisted by a number of disciples, several of whom are
ordained priests.  Private zazen instruction (dokusan) is available by
appointment.  Regular services are held at 10 A.M. on Sundays and
7 P.M. on Wednesdays.  One or three day retreats for intensive
meditation are held monthly.  Lectures and demonstrations are also
made available to any interested organizations.  These have already
been given at churches, Buddhist temples, schools, zen groups,
colleges, and universities.

Under Academy auspices Roshi teaches Chen and Yang (Secret) Styles of
Tai Chi Chuan, I Jin Jing, and Chinese Health Methods.  These
accomplishments and classes themselves offer the most profound
indication of Roshi's dedication to the preservation and dissemination
of the great spiritual treasures of Asia.  They also concretely
express his hope that his students may find the time and determination
to master these arts and continue their transmission and
dissemination.  As we take these classes offered and taught by Roshi,
we may hope eventually to acquire what most, all too often, fail to
gain after a lifetime and  what Roshi has most remarkably achieved in
over three decades of intense study.

Kongo Roshi's expanded teaching schedule now permits him to take on
private students.  Many have personally felt the profound benefits of
private instruction from Roshi.  It is always intense and indeed most
rewarding.  For those ambitious enough to make the commitment to
accelerate and solidify their progress leading toward mastery, it is
to be highly recommended.  In fact, private lessons and encounters
played a vital role in enabling Roshi to acquire so much from Prof.
Huo and Sensei.

It is to be hoped that this biography provides you with some idea of
the intense work involved in this life of multiple discipleships.
Only if you have had some training of this sort can you begin to
really appreciate the extent to which Kongo Langlois Roshi has lived
up to the promise of his Dharma name, Diamond.  For a recorded message
giving current activities of the Temple and the Academy, please call
(708) 869-0554.  To make arrangements for any of the above services
call (708) 272-2070.



Barry Cain <mcain@nwu.edu>
Energy Efficient Environments, Inc.
box 171, 2859 Central St.
Evanston, IL 60201

--------------------end of  original message ----------------------


-----------------------------------------------------------------------
end of file