[This document can be acquired from a sub-directory coombspapers via anonymous
 FTP on the node COOMBS.ANU.EDU.AU]

[Last updated: 15 October 1995]
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
This document describes organizational details of sesshin (a Zen
meditation retreat) as practiced by members of the Sydney Zen Center
of the Diamond Sangha tradition

				SESSHIN CAUTIONS

(Tanto speaks.)
At sesshin, we separate ourselves from the concerns and preoccupations
of our busy every day lives and sink deeply into the question, "What
is my essential nature?"  In these special training circumstances we
are free to devote ourselves entirely to the practice of realising the
Buddha Way.

At sesshin we are free to be true to our hearts.  We are free to
transcend the background chatter of our busy minds and to see into the
fact of our own nature.  Sesshin offers us the chance to make great
progress on the broad path of maturity.

The forms and procedures which follow are designed to establish an
optimum setting for true Zen training for everyone attending sesshin,
a structure which supports each of us in giving full attention to the
matter at hand.  At the same time, internalising the guidelines, and
practising them mindfully, creates an environment for the entire group
which fosters and expresses our deepest aspirations.

There is a lot to remember.  It is all right to make mistakes.  You
will find that you will pick it up as sesshin continues.  Just
practice with sincerity.  If you have heard all this before, please
listen carefully again with beginner's mind.

The three essentials of sesshin.

l.  Don't talk or whisper.
2.  Don't look around.
3.  Don't greet people or make gestures.

If a practice-related problem arises and it is necessary to speak to
someone about it, speak only to the Tanto or to the Teacher in
dokusan.  If a work-related problem arises, speak only to your work
leader - the head vegetable chopper, the head server etc, or to the
Jisha.  Don't speak or write notes to the cooks or to anyone else.
Don't give advice or seek help from your fellow students.  Let the
sesshin leaders and the Teacher handle any difficulties.

Your eyes should be kept lowered.  Eye contact is distracting during
sesshin.  Don't signal others with gestures.  Don't greet or
acknowledge your friends as you come and go in sesshin.  Continue your
zazen at all times.  Keeping your hands in kinhin position whenever
possible will help to bring you back to your practice. During work
periods, bring all your attention to the task at hand.

Schedule and seating arrangements:  The schedule and seating plan for
the dojos are both posted outside the door.  Please keep strictly to
your allocated place and don't interfere with anyone else's mats or
cushions.

Clothing.  Clothing should be plain and dark coloured, preferably
black.  It should be loose-fitting.  Don't wear shorts or singlets.
You may keep a jumper folded at your place in case of cold weather.

Watches.  Unless you have a job which requires wearing a watch -
leaders and cooks - don't wear one.  Sesshin gives us a rare chance to
forget time.

Perfumes and lotions.  Don't wear strong-smelling perfume or
aftershave, it can be distracting.  Insect repellant lotion and
sunscreen is provided on the shelf outside the door.

Promptness and attendance.  Attend every group function. Always be at
your place early.  If you are not at your place, someone will have to
go looking for you.   Don't come in after the bells have rung.
Don't go too far away at the breaks or fall asleep in a far paddock,
you won't be able to hear the han announcing the next period.  Always
stay within earshot.  Don't leave the dojo until you have the signal
to do so.

If some emergency arises, speak only to one of the leaders about it.
Do not leave a note.  Do not ask to leave sesshin just because you are
upset.  Such times can be important for your zazen.  Your absence
inevitably would disturb the group spirit.  Never leave sesshin
wtihout speaking first to one of the leaders and to the Teacher.

Doors and windows.  Be careful when opening and closing doors to cause
the least possible noise.  Doors to be left open should be hooked into
position.  Don't stand about in doorways.  Don't touch the windows in
the dojo.  The leaders will look after them for you.

Shoes.  The verandah is a shoes-off area to save trekking grass into
the dojo.  Sit on the edge of the verandah, take your shoes off and
carry them to the shoeshelf.  Don't leave them higgledy piggledy on
the verandah, where they may block the doors.  Come to the dojo via
the stone step near the double doors to avoid treading around the
verandah.

Smoking:   If there are smokers here, please only smoke during breaks
and go far away, taking care when lighting matches or stubbing out
butts.  Wash your hands afterwards and don't smoke in your sitting
clothes.  Better still, don't smoke up here at all.

Hygiene:  Please wash your hands carefully before handling any food,
and after work periods.  Water is precious here.  Don't wash hands,
clothes or utensils under running water.  Put the plug in the basin.

Dehydration:  Remember to drink plenty of water if the weather is
warm. Don't squirrel mugs away in your tent or there won't be enough
to go round at morning and afternoon tea time.

Toilets:  There are three pit toilets here.  Just use them for
shitting, ladling out some lime every other time.  Put the lid down
when you're through, and close the latch on the toilet door as a
signal the toilet is unoccupied.  Pee outside, discreetly.  Just avoid
peeing between the dojo and hojo area.

Showers:  At Gorricks Run there are two open showers and one cubicle
and there will be hot showers in the lunch break, alternating dojos
every day, tomorrow showers for people in the upstairs dojo, the next
day, downstairs.  Cold showers may be taken during the other breaks or
you may want to take a bucket down to the creek but please soap up and
rinse well away from the creek.

		Dojo Cautions:

(Tanto speaks, Jikki demonstrates)

Entering the dojo.

1)  Step into the dojo, bow in the direction of the altar. This is
your bow to the Buddha.  Do this every time you come in, even if you
are only fetching a cushion.

2)  If you are coming in for zazen, place your hands in the kinhin
position and walk quietly around the edge of the dojo to your seat as
others will be already sitting.

3)  Bow towards your seat.  This is your bow to the Dharma.

4)  Turning in the direction of the altar, face the room and bow.
This is your bow to the Sangha.

5)  Turning in the direction of the altar, take your seat.  Plump up
your cushion if necessary.

Leaving the Dojo.

When you leave the dojo, bow to the Buddha at the door.  There are two
instances when you do not do this, when you are leaving to go to
dokusan and when you are leaving during kinhin (bow as you step out of
the line but not at the door.)

In the Dojo.

Please walk quietly in the dojo and keep your hands in kinhin
position.  The only exception to this is when you leave to go to
dokusan, then your hands should be in gassho and your cushion under
your arm.

Sit still during zazen, chanting and other activities in the dojo.
Ignore minor irritations.  If it is necessary to adjust your position
because you are in pain, and you must be the judge of this, do so
carefully and slowly, keeping your practice going throughout.  Be
careful though - a single shift in position can set off a chain of
moves.

Extra cushions, benches and knee pads are stored under the stairs.
There are chairs outside the dojo to use if your knees are sore.
Please be very careful and aware of your bodies.

(Jikki demonstrates use of chair.  )

Stay with the chair for an entire block of sitting but remember to be
sitting on your cushion or bench for mealtimes.

If you feel a sneeze or a cough coming, do not hesitate to cover your
mouth.,  At such times, consideration for others should be your first
concern.

From time to time during the sesshin day, the Jikki Jitsu will say,
"please sit facing in".  Those in the centre block cannot do this.
Just stay as you are.

Kinhin

(Tanto speaks, Jikki and other leaders demonstrate:)

When you hear the bell ring twice, it is time for kinhin.

Still sitting on your cushion, bow.

Rock gently from side to side.

Turn around on your cushion in the direction of the altar.

Stand up and place your hands in kinhin position.  If your foot has
gone to sleep, be careful when standing.  It's all right to stay
sitting down until you can safely stand.  If you can't join the kinhin
line when it begins, wait on your cushion until your place comes back.
Then gassho and join the line.

Gassho when you hear the Jikki's clappers.  Turn to your left and
start walking.  The Jikki sets the pace.  Please keep up with the
person in front.

Keep your head up and your eyes lowered in kinhin.  There will
sometimes be extended outside kinhin.   Continue your zazen practice
during kinhin and at all other times, keying your breath to your
steps.

The Jikki will clap the clappers before you reach your cushion to let
you know kinhin is finishing.  Stop at your place with your back to
your cushion.

Gassho with everybody together then turn in the direction of the altar
to face your place. gassho again and take your seat.


(Tanto speaks, Jikki and others demonstrate)

If you need to leave the dojo during kinhin to get a drink, go to the
toilet or attend to some sesshin job, you may leave in the following
ways:

1)  Go quickly when you hear the bell struck twice for kinhin,
especially if you are heading for the toilets.  Gassho at the door.

2)  If you cannot leave quickly, walk in the kinhin line until you get
to the door.  Gassho as you leave the line but not at the door.

3)  If the person in front of you leaves, maintain the gap.

4)  When you return to the dojo, wait near the door until your place
in the line comes round.  Gassho quickly and step in.

5)  Sometimes you cannot rejoin the line.  Your place has already
passed or you are too late.  In this situation, wait near the door
until the line has stopped. Bow with the final bow.  Only then return
to your place.  Also if you need to fetch a chair or another cushion
you must wait for the final bow of kinhin. The principle is "everyone
moves together."

Kinhin is not a rest period.  Leave the line only to go to the toilet
or to get a drink or if you need to attend to some sesshin duty, such
as cooking.  If you need to go to the toilet, leave promptly  so you
will be back in the dojo before the bells ring for the next period of
zazen.

Early Morning Procedures

(Tanto speaks, other leaders demonstrate:  )

The bell will be rung at 4 am.  Get up quickly and go to the dojo.

Kentan.  The first period of zazen is sat facing in.  Towards the end
of this, the Teacher will enter the dojo for kentan.  The Teacher
first bows to the altar and then walks slowly round the dojo.  As
he/she approaches your place, raise your hands in gassho but do not
bow.  After the Teacher has passed, lower your hands to zazen mudra
again.

Kyosaku and Massage

I(no speaks, other leaders demosnstrate.)

The kyosaku is an effective way to relieve tiredness and tension, in
the shoulders or on either side of the lower back.  The sound of the
kyosaku, as with all other sounds, brings us back to our practice. The
kyosaku and brief massage will be offered during this sesshin but only
at your request.

To request the kyosaku on the shoulders, when you hear one of the
leaders walking behind you, raise your hands in gassho.  When the
leader taps your shoulder, lower your hands to zazen mudra.  Do not
tense your shoulders but move your head to the side and pull long hair
out of the way.

If you would like to be hit on the lower back, raise your hands in
gassho and lean right forward.

To request a brief massage, do a tea ceremony bow with hands on knees.

When the leader has finished, gassho.  The leader walking the kyosaku
may adjust your posture.

Sutras.

(Ino speaks, other leaders demonstrate.)

1)  To request a sutra book, hands are at gassho.

2)  When you use the book, hold it well up with your three middle
fingers outside and thumb and little finger inside.

3)  When you are not using the book, lay it on the mat beside you, not
on the floor.

4)  Most of the chants are recited with hands in gassho. For the first
day or two, watch the leaders.

Teisho.  (Tanto speaks)

There will be a teisho every afternoon.  The Jiki will say, "Prepare
for Teisho" and everyone stands at their place.  When the weather is
fine, we will sit under the chestnut tree.  Carry your zafu across and
wait for the Ino's signals.  During the talk, sit formally in zazen
position until it is indicated you may sit comfortably.

Dokusan.  (Tanto speaks)

It is important to meet the Teacher in dokusan.  Dokusan is a chance
for creativity and mutual deepening.  The Teacher's intention is to
guide us towards realisation of our essential nature, not to judge us.

Dokusan is a time to ask questions about our practice.  You don't have
to have a reason to go.  Say what is in your heart.  If you have
nothing to say, that's all right.  Tell the Teacher you have nothing
to say.  This is your presentation.

Dokusan is completely confidential.  The Teacher does not discuss it
with anyone else and it is requested that you keep your side private.
The teaching given to you may be harmful medicine for someone else.

(Jisha speaks.)

On the first and last days of sesshin, everybody goes to dokusan in
turn, tapped by the Jisha. This is called sosan.  The Jisha will say,
"Sosan - please wait until you are tapped."   When you are tapped,
take your zafu to your place on the verandah.  The Jisha will ring the
bell for sosan.

At other times, the Jisha will call "Upstairs dokusan" or "downstairs
dokusan".  Stay seated until the Teacher rings the bell, the Jisha
does an accelerando, the Teacher rings again, and finally the Jisha
rings twice, the signal for dokusan to begin.  You may leave the dojo
at this point and take your place in the line outside.

You may also leave the dojo for dokusan when kinhin starts, at the end
of kinhin, when you hear Jisha's two bells, or when somebody else
comes back from dolusan.  This helps to cut the coming and going to a
minimum.

If you are a cook or a leader and you cannot wait in the dokusan line,
stand next to the person standing.  If it's you at the head of the
line and one of the leaders or a cook stands beside you, let them go
in first.

When the person in front of you leaves the dokusan line, take up the
bell-stick and wait for the Teacher's bell.  When you hear it, ring
the bell twice, pick up your zafu and shoes and move to the edge of
the verandah.  Continue your practice while you wait.  When you next
hear the Teacher's bell, leave your zafu behind and set off for the
hojo with your hands in kinhin position.  Leave your shoes on the
verandah and step into the room.  Do a full bow at the threshhold,
close the door and turning to the Teacher, do a full bow, then sit
down in front of the Teacher in any formal zazen position.   (Not full
bows for apprentice teachers)

Give your practice - "I am doing Mu" or "My practice is counting my
breath" - whatever.

Leaving dokusan
(Jisha speaks)

1)  When the teacher rings the bell, do a tea ceremony bow as you sit.

2)  Stand up and gassho, then move towards the door, which you open,
and make a full bow on the threshold again.

3)  Put on your shoes, return to the dojo with your hands at gassho,
collect your cushion and return to the dojo in the ordinary way,
unless kinhin is in progress, in which case follow kinhin procedure.

4)  You may wish to use the toilet or drink some water after dokusan.
Do this mindfully and return to the dojo without delay.


Meals
(Ino speaks)

Please handle your bowls and utensils quietly.  Don't speak to servers
or attempt signals other than those specified.  Remember a brisk
gesture communicates to servers more clearly than a vague wave of your
hand.  Eat everything you accept.  Stay out of the kitchen unless you
have an assignment there.  People with medically assigned diets will
have separate dishes sometimes which will be labelled.  Do not take
them unless you have notified the planners.   Has anybody questions
about formal tea and meals?

General rules for sesshin:
(Tanto speaks)

Do not read or take notes in the dojo. There should be no books except
sutra books in the dojo.  Unless you are working on koans, don't write
or read anything during sesshin.  Sesshin is a wonderful opportunity
to concentrate solely on the matter at hand.  If you are writing and
reading, do so unobtrusively.

It is important to be careful of personal hygiene during sesshin as
infection can spread very quickly.  There is a supply of basic
medicines should you require them.

At the end of each day there is a closing ceremony conducted by the
Jiki and Jisha.  Do not sit up doing zazen after the last gassho but
go straight to bed.

These rules and procedures provide us with a conversation-free
structure that we come to know.  This security sets us free to settle
into our depths.

Sangha Spirit
(Tanto speaks)

Wholeheartedly joining in is the key to a fulfilling sesshin. If you
come from another discipline, please put it aside during sesshin and
join with us.  Engage in the timetable of activities, and in your free
time have a sleep, go for a walk etc.  With this spirit, relaxing or
working, everything becomes zazen.

Join the group.  Do everything our way and forget for the time being
any other practice.  Spend your free time resting, washing or doing
zazen or walking meditation.    There's a lot to remember.  Most of it
is learned as you do sesshin.  Just do your best and feel free to make
mistakes.  No one is judging you.

The term "sesshin" means "to settle the mind, to touch the mind, to
convey the mind".   Each day provides a myriad opportunities to
continue this practice.  Essentially, each moment contains everything
we need.  Doing zazen moment by moment opens us up to these
possibilities, allowing us to settle into our depths.

Enjoy your sesshin. Guard every moment as if it were a precious jewel.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
end of file