[This document can be acquired from a sub-directory coombspapers via anonymous
 FTP and/or COOMBSQUEST gopher on the node COOMBS.ANU.EDU.AU]

The document's ftp filename and the full directory path are given in the
coombspapers top level INDEX file]

[This version: 22 July 1993]
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Charles Callan SLIPPER
June 1984

Mystic Cognition in Zen Buddhism and in Christianity: 
a study of D. T. Suzuki and St. John of the Cross,

a thesis submitted for the degree of Ph.D. to the University of Lancaster,UK


ABSTRACT
The purpose of this thesis is to analyse and to compare mystic or higher
cognition in two figures who can be seen as representative of their traditions.
In doing so the study hopes to attain an insight into the relationship between
the lived experience of Zen Buddhism and Christianity.

Apart from the Introduction and the General Conclusion, the body of the study
falls into three parts. The first (Chapters I-III) deals with how higher
cognition is attained, revealing that despite significant divergences the
accounts of both authors move, as it were, in a parallel direction. The second
part (Chapters IV-V) considers the mode by which higher knowledge is
appropriated. Here, while emphasizing the differences between the two accounts,
it is seen that this appropriation is based on the same fundamental elements for
each. Finally, in the last part (Chapters VI-VII), the study looks at what is
known by higher cognition. This is seen to contain an area where there is
profound overlap, though one which also emphasizes the distinctness of each
system.

Throughout the discussion it becomes apparent that each account contains the
building blocks out of which the other could be constructed. The way in which
this is so, however, is not the same for both. Suzuki's Zen Buddhism, thus,
could be said to indicate John's Christian position, but finally to deny it,
while John's view of higher cognition points to a form of higher knowing that
includes Suzuki's but which concentrates upon aspects of knowing denied by
Suzuki. These contrasting attitudes can be described as 'exclusive' (for Suzuki)
and 'inclusive' (for John) and are seen, ultimately, to be the outcome of
contrasting views upon the relation between the knowing subject and the object
known.

-----
[A complete  bibliography to this thesis is contained within the
zen-and-christian-mysticism.txt document deposited from the Electronic
Buddhist Archives of this Coombspapers collection]
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
end of file