[This document can be acquired from a sub-directory coombspapers via
anonymous FTP and/or COOMBSQUEST gopher on the node COOMBS.ANU.EDU.AU]

The document's ftp filename and the full directory path are given in
the coombspapers top level INDEX file]

[This version: 23 November 1993]
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
This file was copied from an archive of Zen Buddhist texts established
at Sam Huston Univ, Texas, US on a Gopher Host: oac3.hsc.uth.tmc.edu
Path=1/computers/oac_staff/S_Newton/zen

The original document was provided by Steven Newton,
<snewton@oac.hsc.uth.tmc.edu> of the Southwest Chogye International Zen
Academeia 1375 Bunker Hill Houston, TX 77055 English (713) 467-0998
Korean (713) 467-0997 Fax (713) 467-0998
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

Notes:
The text of this talk is from a version in the library of the
Southwest Chogye Zen Center in Houston, Texas. Master Kyong-Ho
(1849-1912) is considered one of the most significant Korean Zen
teachers of the modern era. Among his important disciples was Mann-gong
(1872-1946) who is the direct dharma ancestor of Hye-Am, teacher of
Myo-Bong, who founded the Southwest Chogye Zen Center.


VENERABLE MASTER KYUNG-HO'S
INSPIRATIONAL TALK

1. It is no small thing for a man to become a Bhiku. A man does not
become a Bhiku to eat and dress well. Rather, he wants to be free from
life and death by accomplishing Buddhahood.

2. To accomplish Buddhahood, one has to discover his own Mind, which is
already within his own body.

3. To discover Mind, one should understand that his body is nor more
than a dead corpse and this this world is, for good or bad, nothing but
a dream. Man's death is like popping out in the evening of the same day
that you have popped in during the morning. After death, sometimes one
may be born in one of the hells, sometimes in the realm of animals and
sometimes in the realm of ghosts. Then one must endure incalculable
pains and sufferings.

4. Since this is true do not concern yourself with the worldly life.
Just examine and carefully observe your mind at all times. What does
this which is now seeing, hearing and thinking look like? Does this have
any form or not? It this big or small? Is this yellow or green? Is this
bright or dark?

5. Examine and observer this matter carefully. Let your examination and
observation become like a mouse-catching cat; or like an egg-laying hen;
or like a desperately hungry, old, crafty mouse gnawing a hole in a rice
bag. Let your examination and observation be focused at one point and do
not forget it. Keep it before you by raising doubt and by questioning
yourself. Do not this this doubt go away while you are doing chores or
the like. Do not let your question (doubt) escape from you even while
you are not doing anything special. By eagerly and sincerely practicing
in this manner, finally, there will be the moment of awakening to you
own Mind.

6. Study hard by raising your faith. Raising your faith is sincerely
re-examining the matter just mentioned.

7. To be born a human being is most difficult. It is even more difficult
to be born into favorable circumstances -- harder still to become a
Bhiku. It is the most difficult thing of all to find correct and
righteous Dharma teaching. We should reflect on this matter deeply.

8. Shakyamuni Buddha once said, One who is already a human being is like
a speck of dirt clinging to a fingernail, while the one who has become
an animal by losing his human form is as common as the dirt of the
ground.

If one loses the human form this time, then one will have to wait
countless aeons to recover it. When someone is in the one of the many
hells, he is unaware of it, as if playing games in a flower garden.
Becoming a hungry ghost, asura, or animal, he acts like he is dwelling
in his own home.

9. However, if one is awakened and has accomplished Buddhahood, he does
not have to live or die. That is, he does not have to endure any kinds
of sufferings again. These words should be carefully considered one by
one.

10. Once Zen Master Kwon, a Bhiku, began meditating from morning to
night. As soon as the sun would set, he would beat his fists against the
ground in frustration and cry out, "I have lost another day without
realizing my Mind." He continued this way every day until he was fully
awakened. Since there are many who have exhibited the determination of
Master Kwon, it is impossible for me here to cite everyone who has had
the determination to meditate until enlightened.

11. None of them were worried about living or dying, nor about eating,
dressing well, nor sleeping. In our study, we should practice the same
way. Consider this carefully!

12.	Once Zen Master Tung-san wrote: Do not seek noble titles nor
wish to have possessions nor ask for prosperity. Wherever you happen to
be, just live in accord with your karma here and now in this life. If
your clothes wear out, patch them again and again. If there is no food,
barely even search for it.

When the warm energy under your chin grows cold, suddenly you become a
corpse. What remains after death is only a hollow name. after all, how
many days will this transient body live? Why work hard only to acquire
useless things? That only makes your mind dark and causes you to forget
about studying.

13. After awakening one's on mind, one should always preserve its purity
and tranquillity. Cultivate this mind without allowing it to be tainted
by worldly things. Then plenty of good things (that is, pleasure which
comes from the Awakening) will happen. Faithfully, trust in this. When
you have to die, there will be no more suffering or sickness. You can go
freely to Nirvana or anywhere else you chose (i.e., you control your own
life as a free man in the world).

14.Shakyamuni Buddha said, If anyone -- man or woman, old or young --
has faith in these words and studies, each will, as a result, become a
Buddha.

Why would Shakyamuni Buddha deceive us?

15.The Fifth Patriarch, Hung-yin, the Zen Master, said, By examination
and observation of mind, one will become enlightened naturally.

Then he further promised us that,

If you don't have faith in what I say, in future lives you will be eaten
by tigers over and over again. On the other hand, if I have deceived
you, I will fall into the dungeon of exitless hell.

Since the Patriarchs have said these words, should be not take them to
heart?

16. Those of you who are in this Study, do not agitate your mind; let it
be like a mountain. Let your mind be like a wide and empty space and
continue to reflect on enlightening Dharma like the moon reflects the
sun. Whether others think that I am right or wrong is not your concern.
Do not judge or criticize others. Just be at ease and go on mindlessly
like a simpleton or fool. Or, be like one who is struck deaf and dumb.
Spend your life like you cannot hear a thing or like an infant. Then,
sooner or later, all the delusion will disappear.

17. If one wishes to accomplish Buddhahood, it is useless to attempt to
understand and master the worldly life. It would be like one trying to
fix food out of dung, or like trying to cut jade out of mud. It is
totally useless for the accomplishing of Buddhahood. there is no reason
for occupying oneself completely and thoroughly with worldly affairs.

18. See your own death in the death of others. Do not put your trust in
this body. Rather, remind yourself again and again to not miss a moment
to awaken your own mind.

19. Ask yourself repeatedly, "What does this mind look like?" In your
daily rounds, continue to ask yourself, "What does this mind look like?"
Reflect upon this question so intensely that you are like a starving man
thinking of nothing but good food. Do not loose hold of your questioning
at any time.

20. Buddha has said, Whatever has a form, that is, everything, is all
delusory.

He also said,

Everything that the ordinary human being does is subject to life and
death. There is only one way for use to be a true man and this is
Realization of our own mind.

21. It is said, "Do not drink liquor", since it will intoxicate and make
your mind dull. Also, "Do not speak lies", since it will only accelerate
delusive states of mind. Furthermore, "Do not steal", since it only
helps to make your mind jealous and full of desires. You should observe
these and all the precepts. Breaking the precepts can be very harmful
for your cultivation and for your life itself. You should not cling to
or incline yourself towards breaking any of them.

22. Master Ox-herder, Mokguja (Chinul), once mentioned that, Indulging
in craving and desire for property are as vicious as poisonous snakes.
Watch your body and mind carefully when such desires arise and then
understand them as they are. Detach yourself from them as much as
possible.

23. These words are very important and they should be remembered. They
will make your study more effective. Buddha said,

Becoming angry even once raises ten million vicious sins.

A student simply must endure and tolerate the angry mind. Many masters
have also said that because of anger, man becomes a tiger, a bee, a
snake, or some similar stinging or biting creature. From foolish
mindedness, man becomes either a bird or a butterfly. Depending upon his
degree of low-mindedness, man becomes either an ant, mosquito or the
like. From craving things, man becomes a hungry ghost. The type of
desire or anger molds the nature of hell into which men will accordingly
fall. Each and every state of mind determines the kind of creature man
is to become.


24. However, if one's mind is unattached, one becomes a Buddha. Even a
"good" or positive state of mind is useless. Even though such a
condition of mind can create a heavenly future life, it is still
limited. As soon as one reaches heaven, he immediately begins descending
to the hellish or animal realms in successive rebirths. If no intention
is held in the mind, then there is no place to be born again. One's mind
is so pure and unconfused, it cannot go to the dark places. This pure
and quiescent mind is the way of Buddha.

25. If one questions with the one-pointed concentration, then this mind
naturally settles down and become tranquil. By this he automatically
realizes his own mind as quiescent and tranquil. This is the same as
becoming a Buddha.

26. This way is very direct and goes right to the point. It is the best
way one can practice. Read and examine this talk from time to time and,
on the right occasions, even tell other people. This is as good as
reading eighty-four thousand volumes of scriptures. Studying in this
manner, one will accomplish Buddhahood in this lifetime. Do not
understand this talk to be some contrived encouragement or expedient
deception. Follow these words with your whole-hearted mind.

27. In the deep canyon where the clear stream is flowing continuously,
all kinds of birds are singing everywhere. No one ever comes to visit
this place. It is the so-called Bhiku's place (monastery) and is quiet
and tranquil. Here is where I sit and contemplate and examine what this
mind is. Now, if this mind is not what Buddha is, then what else it?

28. You have just heard a very rare talk. You should continue to study
this great matter enthusiastically. Do not hurry, otherwise you might
become sick or get a terrible headache. Calm yourself, then ceaselessly
meditate. Most of all, be careful not to force yourself. Rather, relax
and let your right questioning be within!

-----------------------------------------------------------------------
end of record

