From: Tyagi@HouseOfKaos.Abyss.com
Date: Tue,  2 Nov 93 13:48:17 PST

[note: this is reprinted from TOPYlondon bulletin, June 1991       ]
[transcribed by Coyote129, TOPY++; c/o box 410724 SFCA, 94141-0724 ]
[                                  alamut@netcom.com  415-431-7541 ]
[ also contact: Station TOPYSOL Box 33540, San Diego, CA 92163-3540]

The following interview between AntiClock Wise and Thee Temple ov
Psychick Youth London Access Point was conducted by mail. It is meant
to give a general picture of TOPY, for more specific info contact
TOPY. It should also be pointed out that the subject of this piece is
NOT the band Psychic TV.

ACW: Can you explain the influences on and foundations of TOPY?  
TOPY: Thee Temple ov Psychick Youth is a world-wide nett-work ov
individuals founded in 1981 (although our roots go back much
further). We are attempting to bring about a radical improvement in
the quality of everyday life (one way of putting it). Most people
pursuing this aim (political parties, performance artists,
psychoanalysts, writers, painters, occult orders, etc) limit
themselves to certain areas of activity. The Temple is designed to be
active in any area, to free our minds by any means necessary. We are
ready to use (and abuse!) or ignore any concept from culture. For
instance, in TOPYLondon, we recognize influences from the following:
William S. Burroughs, Dr, Timothy Leary, Robert Anton Wilson, Aleister
Crowley, Austin Osman Spare, the Situationist International, the
Church of Satan, Dada, Surrealism, Chaos theory, Deconstructionism,
Paganism, The Church of the Subgenius, Nietzsche, Native American
Culture, JG Ballard, Frank Miller, Sesame Street, etc. etc. Every
individual involved brings a new set of experiences and influences.

ACW: How many members do you have and what is the structure of TOPY?
TOPY: The basic structure of TOPY is a non-hierachical network. In
principle, every Individual in the Temple is of equal status. For
administration and organization, however, a two tier system exists.
There are currently three STATIONS (Europe, UK, and USA). There are
also many ACCESS POINTS, the main centres for local
organization. Access Points and Stations are run by the most committed
and active Individuals, who choose themselves to take
responsibility. Our influence is extremely widespread and for this
reason we have no way of knowing exactly how many people use our ideas
or are associated with the network. However, we do know that there are
hundreds of people actively involved worldwide. We don't like to use
the word "member", too many connotations, OK?

ACW: I've been reading Eileen Barker's "New Religious Movements" which
mentions TOPY on a number of occasions. Is TOPY a NRM? If so, what is
your definition of religion?
TOPY: We haven't read this book, so any comments must be indirect.  i)
Cults and religions offer little except domination, dogmas and
imprisonment of the human spirit. In these terms TOPY is and
anti-cult.  We offer no grand solutions to your problems, in fact NO
easy answers to anything. We seek no followers and have no gurus. We
can show by example how we choose to live our lives and what works for
US, but whether people get involved or not is entirely their own
affair. It is more use to us to know one person who means it and wants
to become active and AWAKE than 100 sheep who just use TOPY and a
fashion accessory.  ii) According to the Collins English Dictionary,
the root of the word religion is the Latin "religio" meaning fear of
the supernatural, probably from the word "religare" to tie up, from
"ligare" to bind. The Temple embraces the supernatural and wishes to
set people free - it is an anti-religion. People have always asked
questions like "where do we come from ", "Why do we die", and "Why do
bad things happen?". Most religions seem to be about selling people
easy, and incorrect, answers to these questions, usually involving the
word "GOD" in some form. The Temple encourages people to investigate
all answers to these questions and pick their favorites, or make up
their own. Or, for those with courage, to face this life which has no
reasons.

ACW: What is your relationship and reaction to cults such as the
Unification Church?
TOPY: In a word, "enemy". We have no relationship whatsoever with
mindfuck cults like the Moonies, Christianity, etc. Following gurus
like the Rev. Sun Moon, the Pope or "God" is a pointless, tragic,
exercise.  Cult are like religions, only they want total control and
usually permit no conflicting opinions. We have studied their methods
of control because they provide an insight into the human condition
and hopefully a way to fight back against the Control Process.

ACW: TOPY is still most famous for Psychic TV. Has this hindered your
other work and what is your relationship with PTV?
TOPY: Psychic TV provides a very useful outlet for TOPY ideas. Some
members of the band are very active within the Temple, other not. If
PTV were to cease to exist, TOPY would in no way be diminished - and
they've never held us back for doing anything as far as we know!

ACW: Magick seems to be an important part of TOPY, you seem to mention
Crowley a lot. Yet magick sinister or anachronistic meanings to many
people. Can you explain the type, role and importance of magick for
TOPY?
TOPY: We are interested in magick because it works (for us)> Magick,
like sexuality, has been the subject of a great deal of hysteria and
control.  Both are sources of a great deal of power/energy and this is
precisely why people have been blackmailed into not exploring them.
     Again, we offer no quick solutions. People must find their own
methods and design their own rituals. We can recommend writers or
systems that we've used as a base, but these must be mutated by the
individual into a personal, functional system of realizing their
desires. We are dedicated towards the establishment of a functional
system of magick and a modern pagan philosophy without recourse to
mystification, gods or demons; but recognizing the implicit powers of
the human brain (neuromancy) linked with guiltless sexuality focussed
through will structure (sigils).  Magick empowers the Individual to
embrace and realize their dreams and maximise their natural
potential. It is for those with the power to touch themselves. It
integrates all levels of thought in the first steps towards final
negation of control and fear.

ACW: Manson and Jim Jones imagery has appeared in your
literature. Why?  Do you admire extreme cultists?
TOPY: Lots of imagery has appeared in our literature, why pick on
these ones?We have often been accused of glamourizing these people,
but this simply isn't the case. The Jonestown incident indicate quite
clearly the dangers of following leaders without questioning their
authority. Manson is really rather tedious - a willing scapegoat for
the moral backlash of the '60s. There is a great deal to be learnt
from the media taboos surrounding these people, but our lives are
interesting enough already without and titillating or "shocking"
imagery. Serious research has and is being done into these and other
cults.

ACW: Is TOPY a whole lifestyle? What are your views on sexuality,
race, speciesism, gender?
TOPY: YES! TOPY is a Way of Life (a "lifestyle" sounds like another
bland commodity) not a hobby. It is hypocritical not to attempt to
live out your beliefs and desires 24 hours a day. The Temple seeks to
end personal laziness and engender discipline: Our aim is wakefulness,
our enemy is Dreamless Sleep. It is now one of our primary concerns to
develop TOPY into a way of life in every way shape and form.
   Single issues are dodgy, but on a total level we embrace freedom of
sexuality (and have helped allies on trial here under the antiquated
S&M laws of this repressed county [UK]); we are opposed to fascism of
any kind, be it political, interpersonal or social. TOPY individuals
have been active in the closing of the Brighton Dolphinaruim,
Anti-Fascist Action, Anti Poll Tax, Animal Rights, the Peace movement,
the Right To Party, and many other issues too numerous to mention
here. We attempt to put our words into action in every
situation. Anything less is death.

ACW: What are your views on technology, automation and things such as
Artificial Intelligence?
TOPY: New technology creates new opportunities for human experience,
and raises mankind's limits generally. Unfortunately, technology is
just as susceptible to becoming a control tool as anything else
(religion, sport, etc). Whilst TOPY supports the use of technology to
obviate the need for sentient drudgery, we also recognize that
technology is usually just harnessed to profit (making people more
"productive") and keeping people amused outside their jobs. As an
aside, from the TOPY viewpoint magick and technology are
compatible. There are numerous texts available that integrate current
technology with ritual magick.

ACW: I am particularly interested in what TOPY is doing now. Could you
explain the activities and aims of TOPY for the 1990s?
TOPY: The '90s are going to be a very chaotic time for everyone,
especially us. On the one hand, the nett-work is becoming more
focussed with the publication of books and magazine, more events and
more input from each individual involved. On the other hand we are in
the midst of a backlash against sexuality, the occult, drug use, and
non-conformity. We intend to fight all constraints in any way
possible. One of our long term aims is the setting up of a TOPY tribal
research centre. "The Big House".  We also have a number of events
planned for 1991 - gigs, lectures, film showings, and exhibition, and
group rituals.

END

