COLLECTIVE COPYRIGHT STATEMENT
                              BAHA'I ETEXT SERVER
 
                                February 1997 (revised)
                                (30 September 1999: REVIEWED - no changes)
 
The entire contents of the Baha'i World Centre Etext Server are
copyrighted by the Baha'i International Community, Copyright (c) 1994, All
Rights Reserved, as a collective work (compilation copyright).  They may
be freely redistributed in their entirety provided that this copyright
notice is not removed.  These documents may not be sold for profit or
incorporated in commercial documents without the written permission of the
Baha'i International Community.
 
The Baha'i International Community asserts that it owns the copyrights to
the texts of the four Central figures of the Baha'i Faith (The Bab,
Baha'u'llah, Abdu'l-Baha and Shoghi Effendi) and the texts of letters of
the Universal House of Justice, which are available for distribution by
the Baha'i World Centre Etext Server, as part of its compilation
copyright.
 
Some material in the Baha'i World Centre Etext Server may be copyrighted by
others.  The owner of an individual work added to the compilation ALSO retains
his copyright and the right to control further distribution of his work.  The
copyrights asserted by the Baha'i International Community do not supercede an
author's copyrights.
 
Permission is expressly granted for these documents to be made available
for file transfer from installations offering unrestricted anonymous file
transfer on the Internet.  These documents are provided as is without any
express or implied warranty. Permission for re-use of these documents in
"value-added" or "for profit"  re-publications (in print or electronic
formats), may be requested from:
 
The Secretariat
Baha'i International Community
P.O. Box 155
31001, Haifa
Israel
 
email: secretariat@bwc.org
----------------------------
 
All information in these documents are believed to be correct at this
time.  If you have any additions or corrections, please send them to:
 
Etext Account Manager
Baha'i World Centre Library
 
email:  etext@bwc.org
-----------------------------
 
        PLEASE NOTE:  In addition to the electronic text
        Public Domain or shareware executable programs (such
        as compression/ decompression programs) are occasionally
        offered.  If a program bug is reported in such an
        executable prgram, action will be taken to either correct
        the error or remove the offending program from the
        repository.  Still, users must understand that all
        programs are offered AS IS, and the maintainers of the
        Baha'i World Centre Etext Server specifically disclaim
        any liability should these programs malfunction or cause
        damage, incidental or otherwise.  When testing ANY new
        software, be certain that all information stored on disk
        is backed-up before you start, so that you can recover if
        files are damaged or erased.
 
--------------------------------END----------------------------------
 
